THE SEPSIS
MANUAL
Responsible management of sepsis, severe 
infection and antimicrobial stewardship.7th edition 
Created 2024

Published by: 
United K ingdom Sepsis Trust 
Email: info@sepsistrust.org 
Website: sepsistrust.org 
The UK Sepsis Trust combines clinical  expertise with translational k nowledge to equi p 
health professionals with the knowledge and tools to help them recognise and manage 
sepsis de cisively and r esponsibly witho ut overuse of valuable antibiotics. We also support 
people af fected by sepsis, and w ork to heighten public awareness so that members of the 
public can access healthcare promptly when worried about sepsis. 
2024 United Kingdom Sepsis Trust 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be stored in a retrieval system or reproduced 
in any f orm whatsoever without prior permission in writing from the publisher. This book is 
provided subject to the condition that it shall not, by trade or otherwise, be lent,  resold, 
hired out or otherwise circulated withou t the publishers prior permission in any form of 
binding or cover other than  that in which published,  and without  a similar condition 
including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser. 
ISBN: 978-1-3999-2367-5 
The UK Sepsis Trust registered charity numb er (England & Wales) I 158843 (Scotland) SC050277. Company Reg No 
8644039. Sepsis Enterprises Ltd company number 9583335. VAT Reg No 293133408. 

THE SEPSIS
MANUAL
7th edition
Edited by: Dr Ron Daniels and Professor Tim Nutbeam
This manual is supported by our implementation team of nurses, advanced 
clinical practitioners and doctors. 
Publisher:  United Kingdom Sepsis Trust

In 2017, the World Health Assembly, the decision-making body of the World Health Organisation (WHO), 
adopted a resolution to improve the prevention, diagnosis and management of sepsis. 
This resolution marked a new era in our fight against sepsis. All 194 member states of the United Nations are 
urged to develop national action plans against the condition, which is responsible for 1 in 5 lives lost worldwide.
In 2020, the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation published a report suggesting that sepsis affects 49 
million people worldwide each year, claiming 11 million lives. Many of these fatalities are in children, particularly 
in low and middle income countries.
In the United Kingdom, there are at least 200,000 episodes of sepsis in adults each year and perhaps as many as 
918,000 (Academy of Medical Royal Colleges 2022), with around 48,000 people dying as a result. Sepsis claims 
more lives than breast, bowel and prostate cancer put together.
Many people who develop sepsis have underlying medical conditions, and a significant proportion are frail or 
approaching the end of natural life. We can't prevent every death from sepsis, but we need to work hard to 
reduce the thousands of avoidable deaths. In the context of the rising threat of antimicrobial resistance, we 
must do so responsibly. Antimicrobials must be preserved for the sickest patients, and used correctly – 
otherwise we risk the very real threat of being unable to treat our patients in the not-too-distant future.
We've come a long way since we started this fight over a decade ago. We understand sepsis better and have 
designed effective clinical systems around it. In some countries (including the UK) these steps have resulted in 
gradual improvements in survival. In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, though, the resilience of such learning 
and systems has been tested, and we must strive once more to improve the quality of care.
To achieve our dream of preventing any avoidable death from sepsis, we’ll need continued effort from 
governments, policy makers, professional bodies, the public, the media – and from you. I hope this manual will 
mark the start of a reinvigorated phase in your fight against sepsis, because this involves every one of us.
This manual has been revised for 2024. It embraces the 2024 update of the NICE guidelines NG51 on sepsis, 
which draws upon recommendations from the 2022 Academy of Medical Royal Colleges statement around 
timing of administration of antimicrobials. It is supported by associated UK Sepsis Trust clinical tools and 
education materials.
With very best wishes
Dr Ron Daniels B.E.M, FFICM, FRCA, FRCP(Ed) 
Vice-President - Global Sepsis Alliance 
Founder and Joint CEO - UK Sepsis TrustFOREWORD
"The world must urgently step up efforts to improve data about sepsis 
so all countries can detect and treat this terrible condition in time. 
This means strengthening health information systems and ensuring 
access to rapid diagnostic tools, and quality care including safe and 
affordable medicines and vaccines.”
–Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General “

5CONTENTS
THE BURDEN OF SEPSIS 
AND SEVERE INFECTION
DEFINING SEPSIS
SOURCES OF INFECTION
THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
OF SEPSIS
THE SEPSIS 6
ONGOING CARE
SPECIAL PATIENT GROUPS  
MICROBIOLOGY
HUMAN FACTORS IN SEPSIS  
AFTER SEPSIS - SURVIVOR ISSUES  06
12
29
39
53
84
90
96
104
108
5
THE BURDEN OF SEPSIS
AND SEVERE INFECTION
6
Accurate record keeping is a vital part of good clinical practice. What we write 
in the notes affects not only the care of the individual patient, but also coding. 
In turn, coding affects, e.g., how much a hospital gets paid; and our broader 
societal understanding of clinical & public health issues.  
If we write in the notes ‘possible sepsis’, or ‘? sepsis’ and no one subsequently 
confirms the clinical diagnosis, the patient will not be coded as having sepsis 
even if they end up on Intensive Care with multi-organ failure as a result. 
So, if you think sepsis, remember to say ‘sepsis’, write ‘Diagnosis: sepsis’ or ‘Δ 
sepsis’, and assess and record the level of severity, or acuity. More about this 
below, but remember, coding matters!ESTIMATING THE 
BURDEN OF SEPSIS & SEVERE INFECTION01
Sepsis and severe infection are one of the most common reasons for admission to hospital, and perhaps the 
most common cause of inpatient deterioration.
Whilst this statement might well be true, and other than knowing that it is a significant issue, the reality is 
that we still don’t truly understand the burden of sepsis. This introductory chapter will start by describing 
how we use the best available data to estimate: 
i) How many cases of sepsis we see each year across the United Kingdom (section 2)
ii) How many people die as a result of sepsis (section 3)
iii) The economic burden to our healthcare system and to the wider economy (section 4)
Hospital coded data are collected at a national level in order to examine disease trends and inform 
policy and commissioning of healthcare, which capture the number of 'episodes' of sepsis (not the same 
as the number of people, as some people may develop sepsis more than once!). A clinical coder will 
interpret what's written in a set of notes and translate it into a set of codes, based on the International 
Classification of Disease criteria. These are currently in their 11th iteration, ICD-11, which 
incorporates the 2016 'Sepsis-3' definition.
This system isn't quite perfect, and might under-estimate the number of people with sepsis. A 2015 report, 
‘Just Say Sepsis’, by the National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death (NCEPOD) found that, 
where patients with sepsis had died, it was only recorded on the death certificate in 40% of cases . 
CLINICAL PRACTICE TIPNUMBER OF 
CASES02
7
In England, coded data are assimilated into ‘Hospital Episode Statistics (HES)’ data. When we look at 
data like these over the years, it appears that sepsis is becoming 'more common', but it's likely most of 
this is down to improving recognition and coding. However, our ageing population and increasing 
tendency to perform a greater number of invasive interventions will have a significant effect. 
Antimicrobial resistance plays a small, but ever-growing part. 
An analysis by the UK Sepsis Trust of HES data for England for the year 2017/18 showed around 
200,000 admissions to hospital with sepsis. How does this estimate stack up against other evidence?
1.Recent work in the UK and further afield estimates around 5% of Emergency Admissions to be
due to sepsis. There were around 4.5 million Emergency Admissions during 2017-18 – this would
mean around 226,000(1) cases of sepsis in the UK. per year
2.A 2001 United States study suggested an incidence of 300 episodes per 100,000 population,
which for the UK with a population of 67 million would mean 202,500(2) cases
3.A 2016 study in Sweden suggested an incidence of 780 cases per 100,000 population, which
would mean the UK would see 526,500(3) cases
4.In January 2020, the Global Burden of Disease team estimated that the UK sees 245,000(4) cases
of sepsis with 48,000 deaths (IHME, 2020). However, the study acknowledged imperfections in the
use of coded data alone
5.In 2022, the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges estimated that there are 918,000(5) admissions to
hospital with 'suspicion of sepsis' across the UK each year (extrapolated from Inada-Kim 2017)
Applying these sense checks to the estimate yielded by coded data would therefore seem to 
support that there are at least 200,000 cases of sepsis each year in the UK, more likely 250,000, and 
possibly quite a few more!
To put this into context, latest figures from the British Heart Foundation estimate there to have been 
100,000 admissions with heart attack in the UK per year.
It's important to acknowledge that it's often difficult to distinguish clinically between sepsis and 
severe infection, particularly at first presentation. There are well over 1.5 million episodes of the most 
common sources of infection giving rise to sepsis each year in England alone- it is likely that at least a 
proportion of these will also have sepsis but not be coded as such.
8

NUMBER OF 
DEATHS03
Between 2015 and 2020, governments in Scotland and Wales reported national mortality rates of 20% 
and 24% respectively. In 2018, Professor Sir Brian Jarman reported mortality rates in England to be just 
below 20%.
If we apply a 20% mortality rate across the estimated 250,000 people developing sepsis annually in the 
UK, we would estimate that we see 50,000 deaths each year. The Global Burden of Disease team 
estimate from 2020 for the UK was similar, suggesting 48,500 deaths in the UK per year. In 2022, the 
Academy of Medical Royal Colleges suggested a higher number of deaths at 66,096 each year.
It seems highly likely that, across the UK, sepsis claims 48,500 lives per year.
SEPSIS CLAIMS MORE LIVES THAN LUNG 
CANCER, AND MORE THAN BOWEL, BREAST 
AND PROST ATE CANCER COMBINED
9
THE COST OF 
SEPSIS04
In 2017, the UK Sepsis Trust commissioned an independent piece of work from the York Health Economics 
Consortium (YHEC) to estimate the cost burden of sepsis to the NHS, and to our wider economy.
YHEC estimated direct costs to the NHS based upon the use of consumables, drugs, clinical time and bed days 
in hospital, together with the need for rehabilitation, ongoing organ support and other access to healthcare. 
The group also estimated indirect costs, primarily due to lost productivity, but also in litigation.
Clearly, if a patient suffers a sepsis-related death, they are unable to return to productive life, and they will 
not be able to pay taxes – the same is true for many survivors. For example, 22% of survivors of sepsis who 
have needed Intensive Care have post-traumatic stress disorder; and 17% of survivors have moderate-to-
severe cognitive decline. Even if we do save a life, and particularly if we delay diagnosis and treatment, 
survivors might struggle to return to their previous quality of life for some time.
YHEC estimated, given that there are at least 200,000 cases of sepsis every year, that sepsis costs the NHS 
between £1.5 and £2 billion each year, and our wider economy at least £11 billion and possibly as high as 
£15.6 billion.
The direct cost of sepsis to the NHS accounts for a full 1% of NHS budget.
To put these figures into context, the Asthma UK Centre in Applied Research estimates the annual cost to the 
NHS of treating Asthma to be £1.1 billion.
SEPSIS COSTS THE NHS 
MORE THAN ASTHMA
10
CONCLUSION
Whilst we have improved our recording of the number of cases of sepsis and understand better its 
impact on the NHS and society, we still have to estimate figures based on the best available data.
Conservative estimates would suggest that we see at least 200,000 cases of sepsis in the UK each year, 
with around 48,500 deaths and a direct cost to the NHS of at least £1.5 billion. Sepsis costs our society as 
much as £15.6 billion every year. It is likely that even these numbers are under-estimates, since a 
proportion of the more than 1.5 million patients suffering severe infection in England every year are 
likely to have uncoded sepsis. The Academy of Medical Royal Colleges in 2022 estimated that we may see 
as many as 66,096 deaths each year from sepsis.
Whichever way we cut it, sepsis is huge. 
11
12
DEFINING
SEPSIS
12
INTRODUCTION
The definition of sepsis has changed over time, and will continue to do so. These changes have, at times, 
created confusion, but it is hoped that from the time of writing there will be a period of stability for some 
years while we continue to advance improvements in clinical systems and understanding.
There are various purposes to a definition for any condition, including:
• The use of a common language to improve communication between health professionals, and 
between healthcare systems and their patients
• The use of language suitable to educate the well public about the condition
• The establishment of criteria and thresholds beyond which intervention is recommended
• Provision of criteria to determine eligibility for inclusion in a clinical trial, audit or assessment
There follows a fairly detailed description of how 
we’ve arrived at where we are now: detail is 
included as many will have existing knowledge, 
and some might feel confused as to the various 
terms and definitions around sepsis. “
13A single description can't fulfil all of these purposes. In a complex condition like sepsis (which can affect 
multiple organ systems, can strike at any age and can occur as a result of almost any infection caused by a 
vast range of pathogens) it's likely that any ‘official’ and necessarily precise definition using a wide array of 
criteria would be operationally challenging to deliver at the bedside. Thus, for sepsis, we have multiple 
components to our definition. This chapter will describe the definitions of sepsis in non-pregnant adults, and 
will draw on the recommendations of the Task Force for the Third International Consensus Definitions for 
sepsis and septic shock (known as ‘Sepsis-3’ and published in 2016), together with operational ‘bedside’ 
solutions included in the NICE 2024 update to the NICE guideline NG51.
No definition is currently perfect, and we do not yet enjoy the routine adoption of any one set of criteria to 
prompt either a screen for sepsis or treatment for sepsis. 
Red Flag Sepsis, an operational tool put forward by the UK Sepsis Trust in 2015 and endorsed by the 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in 2016, applies individual 'red flag' clinical criteria 
to a patient with a NEWS2 score of 5 or above (or who appears unwell to a health professional) to empower 
clinicians to treat as sepsis. The 2022 Academy of Medical Royal Colleges guidance recommends that this be 
to empower rapid action in patients with a NEWS2 score of 7 or higher, but adoption of this guidance is not 
yet uniform. Precision is not always possible. From a patient’s perspective, and often that of an organisation, 
the difference between sepsis and a severe infection requiring hospital admission for intravenous antibiotics 
is somewhat semantic!
Where it is felt it will add clarity, we make reference to now historic aspects of sepsis definitions.
NARRATIVE 
DEFINITIONS01
The 2015 NCEPOD study ‘Just Say Sepsis’ found around 80% of episodes of sepsis in the UK to occur in 
response to community-acquired infections. That same study also found that patients delayed accessing 
healthcare, often by two days or longer. For this reason, it is essential that we have a narrative definition, 
using accessible language, which can be used to describe sepsis to the public.
In 2010 in New Jersey, the Global Sepsis Alliance penned what is now accepted by all parties as the best 
way to encapsulate what we know about sepsis in such communication. This definition, termed the ‘Me-
rinoff definition’ after the family who sponsored the meeting, was considered by the Sepsis-3 Task Force to 
be the most suitable for current use:
However, the Task Force considered it appropriate to modify this slightly for use by health professionals to 
reinforce the fact that sepsis is used to describe only those patients who have organ dysfunction :
Importantly, both describe sepsis not as ‘a bad infection’, but as the body’s response to infection. This is 
helpful in order for us and our patients to understand that antibiotics alone will not fix the problem.
Septic shock is a subset of sepsis. In Sepsis-3, septic shock was redefined:Lay definition of sepsis: the Merinoff definition
‘Sepsis is a life-threatening condition that arises when the body’s response 
to an infection injures its own tissues and organs.’
Professional narrative definition of Sepsis: ‘Sepsis-3’
‘Sepsis is characterised by a life-threatening organ dysfunction due to a 
dysregulated host response to infection.’
Definition of septic shock: ‘Sepsis-3’
‘Septic shock is a subset of sepsis where particularly profound circulatory, 
cellular and metabolic abnormalities substantially increase mortality.’
14
SCREENING 
PROMPTS02
Now that we know that sepsis is characterised by organ dysfunction as a result of an infection, we need to 
know in which patients we should start looking for sepsis. When we consider if a patient has sepsis or not 
and make a decision, this process is called 'screening'. Where possible, we should record that screening 
has occurred. 
Risk factors for sepsis should prompt a high index of suspicion for sepsis – health professionals should 
always ‘think sepsis’. In a resource-constrained, busy healthcare system, this is not always 100% reliable. It 
is important to have a set of criteria which indicate potential acute illness or deterioration, and which in 
the context of infection should prompt a health professional to actively look for organ dysfunction.
Of course, though patients with risk factors are more prone to developing sepsis, it is important not to rely 
upon risk factors alone. NICE, in NG51, also recommend the application of clinical acumen – to 
‘think sepsis’ if a patient looks unwell, if they are deteriorating unexpectedly or failing to improve as 
expected. It is particularly important to listen to the concerns of colleagues, the patient, and their 
advocates, carers or family. Subtle cues such as ‘she’s not normally like this’ and ‘I’ve never seen him so 
unwell’ should not be ignored. Risk factors according to NG51 are detailed in the box opposite.
You might have heard (or read) about qSOFA. This was a tool proposed as a screening prompt by the 
Sepsis-3 Task Force to aid in the identification of patients with infection who have a high risk of death 
(‘SOFA’ is an acronym derived from the Sequential (or Sepsis-related) Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) 
score). A qSOFA was positive if the patient was found to have 2 or more of the following:
In 2021, the most recent Surviving Sepsis Campaign academic guidelines strongly recommended against 
the use of qSOFA as a screening prompt for sepsis, particularly in systems already using track-and-trigger 
scoring systems such as the National Early Warning Score (NEWS2). So let's assume that we will no longer 
be using qSOFA in NHS practice!Respiratory rate of 22/min or greater
Altered mentation (Glasgow Coma Scale of less than 15)
Systolic blood pressure of 100 mmHg or less
15
RISK FACTORS 
FOR SEPSIS
(adapted from NICE guideline [NG51], Sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and early management, 2016)
The very young (under one year) and older people (over 75 years) or people who are very frail
People who have impaired immune systems because of illness or drugs, including:
• people being treated for cancer with chemotherapy
• people who have impaired immune function (for example, people with diabetes, people who
have had a splenectomy, or people with sickle cell disease)
• people taking long-term steroids• people taking immunosuppressant drugs to treat non-malignant disorders such as rheumatoid
arthritis
• people who have had surgery, or other invasive procedures, in the past 6 weeks• people with any breach of skin integrity (for example, cuts, burns, blisters or skin infections)• people who misuse drugs intravenously• people with indwelling lines or catheters
Women who are pregnant, have given birth or had a termination of pregnancy or miscarriage 
in the past 6 weeks are in a high-risk group for sepsis. In particular, women in this group who:
• have impaired immune systems because of illness or drugs
• have gestational diabetes or diabetes or other comorbidities• have needed invasive procedures (for example, Caesarean section, forceps delivery, removal of
retained products of conception)
• had a prolonged rupture of membranes• have or have been in close contact with people with group A streptococcal infection, for example,
scarlet fever
• have continued vaginal bleeding or an offensive vaginal discharge
For neonates, risk factors include:
• invasive group B streptococcal infection in a previous baby• maternal group B streptococcal colonisation, bacteriuria or infection in the current pregnancy• premature rupture of membranes• preterm birth following spontaneous labour (before 37 weeks’ gestation)• suspected or confirmed rupture of membranes for more than 18 hours in a preterm birth• intrapartum fever higher than 38°C, or confirmed or suspected chorioamnionitis• parenteral antibiotic treatment given to the woman for confirmed or suspected invasive bacterial
infection at any time during labour, or in the 24-hour periods before and after the birth (this doesnot refer to intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis)
• suspected or confirmed infection in another baby in the case of a multiple pregnancy
16
The National Early Warning Score (NEWS2), from the Royal College of Physicians
17
NEWS2
In late 2017, the Royal College of Physicians launched the second incarnation of NEWS (the National Early 
Warning Score) for national roll out. As well as being useful for identifying unwell patients from all causes, 
NEWS2 has been found to perform well in patients with sepsis and time dependent infection.  
We recommend that a patient be screened for sepsis when in 
the context of presumed or confirmed infection: 
THE NEED FOR 
SCREENING – CONFIRMING 
INFECTION SUSPECTED03
Using our chart or screening tool we have identified a patient who requires screening for sepsis:
START SEPSIS SCREEN IF THE PATIENT:
It is important to be mindful that other things can cause deterioration. Before we move on to look for 
signs of organ dysfunction (and therefore ‘diagnose sepsis’), we need to confirm we are on the right 
track. We need to consider carefully, using clinical examination and history-taking supported (later) by 
investigations, whether the patient is likely to have a new underlying infection or whether we need to 
look for other, equally important, diagnoses. 
If a patient or those close to them are unable to give a good history, for example people with English as a 
second language or people with communication difficulties (such as learning disabilities or autism), take 
extra care to assess for risk of sepsis and involve others close to the patient or interpreters as 
appropriate.
As always, the UK Sepsis Trust seeks to make such definitions usable at the bedside – often most needed 
at first point of contact with a health professional in hospital – we are conscious that we rarely have 
rapid access to a neutrophil count, thus have changed this within our tools to a patient who has recently 
undergone chemotherapy.
18•HAS A NEWS2 SCORE OF 5 OR ABOVE
•LOOKS UNWELL TO A CLINICIAN OR CARER
•HAS HAD RECENT CHEMOTHERAPY OR IMMUNOTHERAPY
•HAS A LACTATE 2mmol/L OR ABOVE
•HAS A NEWS2 SCORE OF 5 OR ABOVE
•LOOKS UNWELL TO A CLINICIAN OR CARER
•HAS HAD RECENT CHEMOTHERAPY OR IMMUNOTHERAPY
•HAS A LACTATE 2mmol/L OR ABOVE
All that's needed is a reasonable clinical suspicion of infection, so a chesty cough with green sputum, or 
pain on passing offensive-smelling urine in someone who’s been feeling unwell are as good as a chest X-
ray, and arguably better than a urine dipstick!
Sometimes, of course, you might think a patient has an infection but have no idea (at first) where. Such a 
patient might clearly describe a history of fever, they might be running a high (or low) temperature, or 
show other signs of infection such as sweating or looking flushed. That’s fine – clinical suspicion of an 
infection is all that’s needed at this stage. We will discuss the importance of identifying the source and if 
necessary 'controlling' it later in the manual. 
If you’re really unsure whether this is an infective or non-infective cause of illness, it’s always best to 
check. Ask a senior, ensure someone orders tests such as a chest X-ray and blood tests, and revisit the 
diagnosis once you have more information. It’s not good practice to proceed to looking for organ 
dysfunction and treating with broad-spectrum antibiotics ‘just in case’, and it might lead the entire team 
down the path of wrongly assuming the patient has sepsis and failing to treat another condition.
LOOKING FOR ORGAN 
DYSFUNCTION: 
‘DIAGNOSING’ SEPSIS, AND DETERMINING ITS SEVERITY04
Remember that the narrative definition of sepsis requires the patient to have one or more ‘dysfunctional’, 
or failing organs.
We are going to consider two routes by which organ dysfunction can be identified: change in SOFA score, 
and the high risk criteria updated by NICE in 2024 (also known as 'Red Flag Sepsis' criteria).
i. SOFA score
Sepsis-3 recommends the use of an increase in a patient’s Sequential (or Sepsis-related) Organ Failure As-
sessment Score (SOFA) of two points (or a score of two where a patient presents for the first time and the 
baseline isn’t known) as the ‘official’ definition of sepsis. It is likely that this score is the most appropriate 
measure available at present to formally identify organ dysfunction- for example, for use to identify patients 
for inclusion in research.
19
Measurement Score
Respiratory
PaO2/FiO2 (mmHg) <400 1
<300 2
<200 + ventilated 3
<100 + ventilated 4
Nervous system
GCS 13-14 1
10-12 2
6-9 3
<6 4Measurement Score
Liver
Bilirubin 
(μmol/l)20-32 1
33-101 2
102-204 3
>204 4
Coagulation
Platelets x103/μl <150 1
<100 2
<50 3
<20 4
Cardiovascular system
Mean arterial pressure <70 mmHg 1
Receiving dopamine ≤5 µg/kg/min or dobutamine (any dose) 2
Dopamine >5 µg/kg/min OR epinephrine OR norepinephrine ≤0.1 µg/kg/min 3
Dopamine >15 µg/kg/min OR epinephrine OR norepinephrine >0.1 µg/kg/min 4
Renal systemCreatinine (μmol/l) (or urine output) 110-170 1
171-229 2
(or <500 ml UO per day) 300-440 3
(or <200 ml UO per day) >440 4The SOFA score
So, a change in SOFA score is the ‘official’ diagnostic criterion for the diagnosis of organ dysfunction and 
therefore sepsis. However, it is difficult to envisage an NHS organisation reliably calculating formal SOFA 
scores on a busy ward or in a overstretched Emergency Department. It also shares some of the issues of 
previous organ dysfunction criteria lists, including a reliance on blood tests which are typically not ‘back’ at 
the time of first assessment of the patient.
Some readers will, rightly, be asking what on earth a PaO2/FiO2 ratio is, how you measure mean arterial
pressure or indeed what a dose of norepinephrine of >0.1 µg/kg/min means! You’re not alone. This was a 
definition created for the most part for use by Critical Care specialists.
A change in SOFA score remains the most robust definition of 
organ dysfunction in this patient population. However, for 
organisations without excellent electronic systems, we need 
something more pragmatic.
ii.High Risk Criteria/Red Flag Sepsis
For 
the 2024 update of NICE guideline NG51, the Guideline Development Group drew heavily on the 2022 
Statement from the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. The revised guideline calls for a comprehensive risk 
assessment of the individual patient by a doctor or equivalently trained health professional at FY2 or above. 
The new High Risk criteria also recognise that at a national level within the UK there are two clear inflection 
points for mortality in NEWS2: those within aggregate score of 7 or higher having higher mortality than those 
with a score of 5 or 6, and those with a score of 4 or below having lower mortality .
20
CLINICAL PRACTICE TIP
Whether you call these criteria High Risk criteria or Red Flag Sepsis criteria, They should 
prompt immediate action. They are designed to empower health professionals to 
initiate the delivery of the Sepsis 6, which since 2018 has included as a first step 
consultation with a senior decision-maker to identify other conditions which may mimic 
sepsis. They should prompt delivery of all elements of the sepsis six within one hour.
It is hugely important to reinforce that clinical judgement should always come first. If a 
patient with suspected infection has one or more High Risk/Red Flag criteria, but you 
believe there is a clear alternative cause,then providing you document reasons it is 
perfectly acceptable to consider alternative courses of action. Similarly, if the patient 
you believe at tisk of sepsis doesn't quite reach the criteria but you are very worried 
about the patient then you should feel empowered to act.
21
As with the original Red Flag Sepsis criteria developed by the UK Sepsis Trust in 2015 and subsequently 
incorporated in the original 2016 NG51 guideline, the 2024 update recognises that, in addition to an 
aggregate NEWS2 score of 7 as a High Risk criterion, any individual parameter scoring 3 is of concern 
and indicative of potential organ dysfunction even if the total score is only 5 or 6. For 2024, high risk 
criteria also include a patient who looks extremely unwell to a health professional or who is actively 
deteriorating, reinforcing the importance of robust clinical assessment and the exercising of clinical 
judgement. Skin colour changes and rashes are also included as High Risk criteria despite not being 
formally captured within NEWS2.
Red Flag criteria are intended as an operational solution to the complex process of sepsis risk 
stratification, and are generally accepted as clinically relevant. 
‘RED FLAG’ criteria indicating a high risk of deterioration
HIGH RISK
                                                  OFSEPSIS  
START
SEPSIS SIX02
YES
Clearly not all Red Flag criteria can be measured in all clinical settings. Whilst most General 
Practitioners now have access to pulse oximetry (for adults), it would be difficult to accurately 
measure hourly urine outputs in the back of an ambulance. The UK Sepsis Trust website has 
examples of clinical tools tailored to each clinical area.IS NEWS2  7 OR ABOVE?
OR  NEWS2 IS 5 OR 6 AND   ONE OF:
Any one NEWS2 parameter with score of 3 
Mottled  or ashen skin
Non-blanching rash  
Cyanosis of skin, lips or tongue  
Deterioration since last assessment  
Deterioration since recent intervention  
Lactate > 2mmolL OR known AKI
Clearly  the absence of a Red Flag/ High Risk criterion does not necessarily indicate a patient is well – it 
would be illogical to think a patient with, say, a heart rate of 131 needed ‘blues and twos’ to hospital 
whereas another with a heart rate of 129 could be left at home.
NG51 therefore introduces a second, ‘safety net’, risk assessment – the presence (or absence) of 
‘moderate risk’, or Amber Flag criteria.
‘Amber Flag’ criteria indicating a moderate to high risk of deterioration:
22CLINICAL PRACTICE TIP
What is this manual is primarily aimed at health professionals working in acute settings such as  
hospitals, acute mental health facilities and the ambulance service, we recognise that it might  
be accessed by health professionals working in other areas. Actions will vary according to your 
clinical setting – for a General Practitioner or Community Nurse, this might be to call 999 and 
communicate using the term ‘Red Flag Sepsis’. For a Paramedic, this might be immediate  
transfer to hospital and consideration of delivery of antibiotics if transit time is an excess of 
one hour. For a health professional in hospital, this will be to ensure delivery of the Sepsis 6.
The presence of one or more Moderate Risk/ Amber Flag criteria should prompt the health 
professional to consider action. Health professionals outside hospital should consider whether the 
patient can safely be cared for in the community or alternatively requires hospital assessment (with 
appropriate documentation of the decision and safety netting if the patient is to be managed in the 
community). 
For health professionals in hospital, a single Amber Flag/ Moderate Risk criterion should prompt a full 
set of blood tests (to include VBG with lactate, glucose, Full Blood Count, urea and electrolytes, C-
reactive Protein  (CRP), liver function tests and enzymes and clotting) and strongly consider discussion 
with  a senior doctor or equivalent nurse, midwife or allied health professional.  Key is a decision as to 
whether antimicrobials are needed or not: if they are required, they should be administered as soon as 
possible but ALWAYS within 3 hours. If not, the reasons should be clearly documented.
Decision-making, once Amber Flag(s) have been identified, is based upon clinical judgement and should 
take into account both patient and environmental factors. If blood tests reveal the presence of an 
acute kidney injury, or if the lactate is found to be higher than 2 mmol/l, the patient moves 
immediately to the Red Flag Sepsis/ High Risk pathway and the Sepsis 6 should be immediately 
commenced.

If there is no acute kidney injury, and the lactate is less than 2 mmol/l, the responsible clinician should 
make a decision: if in the community, whether hospital assessment is urgently required; and if in 
hospital whether antibiotics are needed urgently.
Should a decision not to transfer to hospital be made by a clinician in the community, this should be 
documented, appropriate verbal and preferably written safety netting should be given, and 
consideration given to a scheduled review.
Should a clinician in hospital decide urgent antimicrobials are unnecessary, they should consider 
alternative diagnoses and assess severity of illness in that context. Discharge from hospital, possibly 
with oral antibiotics, may be appropriate with safety netting and consideration given to a scheduled 
review. If neither a Red Flag nor an Amber Flag are present, this indicates a low risk of adverse 
outcome from infection. This does not mean the patient is necessarily ‘fine’! Other conditions should 
be considered, and standard protocols followed. If care in the community is considered suitable, then 
verbal and written safety netting instructions should be provided where appropriate.
23
SUMMARY05
Sepsis and (despite adequate volume resuscitation) both of:
• Persistent hypotension requiring vasopressors to maintain Mean
Arterial Pressure (MAP) greater than or equal to 65 mm Hg, and
• Lactate greater than or equal to 2 mmol/l.We have now determined whether the patient with infection requires immediate intervention (High Risk 
or 'Red Flag' Sepsis), urgent assessment for possible intervention (Moderate Risk or 'Amber Flag' Sepsis), 
or in the absence of any of these has a low risk of deterioration from infection.
We described Septic Shock in narrative terms in Section 1, as ‘a subset of sepsis where particularly 
profound circulatory, cellular and metabolic abnormalities substantially increase mortality’. The Sepsis-3 
authors were looking to identify patients with a particularly high risk of death in this group, and from a 
recognition perspective described septic shock as:
Box 5 describes appropriate terms to use in written and verbal communication when discussing 
sepsis, and is derived from Table 2 in the 2022 Academy of Medical Royal Colleges guidelines. 
Box 5
Term ‘Official’ meaning
Infection Invasion of body tissues by disease-causing microorganisms.
Uncomplicated infectionInfection not resulting in new or worsening organ dysfunction i.e. 
change in SOFA score <2 points 
24
Term ‘Official’ meaning
SepsisLife-threatening organ dysunction caused by a dysregulated host 
response to infection. Clinically characterised by a change in SOFA 
score ≥2 points
Septic shockA subset of sepsis in which particularly circulatory, cellular, and 
metabolic abnormalities are associated with a greater risk of 
mortality than with sepsis alone. Clinically identified by a 
vasopressor requirement to maintain a mean arterial pressure ≥65 
mmHg plus a serum lactate >2 mmol/L that persist s despite 
adequate fluid resuscitation
National Early Warning Score-2. 
An aggregate severity of illness score (0-20) for adults with points 
ascribed to increasing physiological abnormalities (respiratory rate, 
pulse oximetry-measured oxygen saturation, requirement for 
supplemental oxygen, systolic blood pressure, heart rate, level of 
consciousness, temperature)
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score. 
An aggregate point score (1-4) with points ascribed to increasing 
physiological and biochemical abnormalities representing 
dysfunction of six organ systems (respiratory, cardiovascular, 
hepatic, coagulation, renal, neurological)
Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome. Characterised by ≥2 
criteria exceeding thresholds for temperature, heart rate, 
respiratory rate and white blood count. Formerly used in 
combination with infection to identify ‘sepsis’ but now discarded as 
often represents an appropriate (i.e. non-pathological) host 
response to any inflammatory (i.e. non-specific for infection) insult
Outdated terminology combining SIRS + organ dysfunction; now 
replaced by ‘sepsis’
Redundant (and meaningless) term formerly used to describe 
sepsis
Redundant (and meaningless) term formerly used to describe 
sepsisNEWS-2
SOFA score
SIRS
Severe sepsis
Septicaemia
Blood poisoning
25
Within this chapter, we’ve explored the balance between the need for an ‘official’ definition of sepsis – 
primarily for use in Critical Care and important for ensuring we are entering the right patients into clinical 
trials – and a more pragmatic, ‘bedside’ definition. Regarding the latter, we have discussed t how the UK 
Sepsis Trust has worked to translate the 2024 NG51 update into tools for use across the healthcare system.
The UK Sepsis Trust website (sepsistrust.org) has tools for use by any health professional in the community, 
in General Practice, in prehospital services and in hospitals. Whilst it would be clumsy to include all within 
this manual, over the next two pages you will find examples for use in hospitals and in Ambulance Services 
for reference. Others are similar. Always check sepsistrust.org for the latest versions.
CLINICAL PRACTICE TIP
Pragmatically, septic shock should be a term used in written and verbal 
communication to describe ‘presumed’ septic shock: a patient who is 
hypotensive AND who has a lactate >2 mmol/l following fluid resuscitation. We 
should not rely on the need for vasopressors to make a presumptive diagnosis 
of septic shock outside a Critical Care environment.Term
Term ‘Official’ meaning
UrosepsisShould only be used to describe a urinary tract infection (UTI) with 
new organ dysfunction, not any type of UTI
Should only be used in patients with neutropenia related to an 
underlying disease or treatment who develop new infection-
related organ dysfunction. Neutropenic infection should 
preferentially be used for neutropenic patients with an 
uncomplicated infection. n.b. sepsis itself may induce a transient 
leucopenia but this should not be classified as neutropenic sepsis 
alongside the above populations
Patient with neutropenia and a pyrexia ≥38°C which may or may 
not be due to infection
Infection of one or both lungs caused by a pathogen. This term 
should be reserved for more serious lung infection rather than an 
uncomplicated lower respiratory tract infection
A term used to describe the presence of any one or more Red Flag 
criterion(-a) from the UK Sepsis Trust tools
A term used to describe the presence of any one or more Amber 
Flag criterion from the UK Sepsis Trust toolsNeutropenic sepsis
Febrile neutropenia  
Pneumonia
Red Flag Sepsis
Amber Flag Sepsis
26
Appendix 1: Inpatient Sepsis Screening and Action Tool (Always check sepsistrust.org for the latest versions.)
27

Appendix 2: Prehospital Sepsis Screening and Action Tool (Always check sepsistrust.org for the latest versions.)
28

SOURCES OF 
INFECTION
29
The clinical signs and symptoms of early sepsis can be vague, subtle or non-specific; for instance, a mild 
tachycardia or fever. This can make early diagnosis challenging, as early signs can be missed  by health-care 
providers.  Few doctors  can describe the definition of sepsis accurately, so it’s no surprise that sepsis can be 
difficult to identify and therefore that delays in initiating treatment are common. Regular screening of 
patients at risk of sepsis and early, and judicious treatment of those presenting with likely sepsis, are key to 
improving patient outcomes.
An understanding of the potential and common sources of infection and their modes of presentation will 
help you to identify those at risk of sepsis and choose an appropriate treatment regime. A search for the 
source of infection is critically important toward ensuring that we use antimicrobial agents responsibly by 
allowing us to target treatment with evidence-based, often narrower spectrum choices of agents.
PNEUMONIA
What is it?
Pneumonia is an infection of the lung tissue, and as a source of infection is responsible for approximately 
50% of all episodes of sepsis. When a person has pneumonia, the lungs become filled with microorgan-
isms, fluid, and inflammatory cells which make the work of breathing difficult and prevent the lungs from 
working properly.
How will the patient present?
Diagnosis of pneumonia is based on the signs and symptoms of an acute lower respiratory tract infection.  
These might include a productive cough, tachypnoea, noisy breathing (sometimes audible from the end of 
the bed), or respiratory distress. In the later stages of this condition impending respiratory failure might 
be recognised through the development of cyanosis, severe fatigue or even a reduced conscious level due 
to exhaustion or hypercapnia.
Diagnosis
Pneumonia can be confirmed by a chest X ray showing new shadowing that is not due to any other cause 
(such as pulmonary oedema or infarction). Other imaging, such as CT or ultrasound, may show new 
consolidation. Do not wait for a chest X-ray to confirm pneumonia before starting treatment if sepsis is 
suspected!
Additional
Pneumonia can be classified as community acquired pneumonia (CAP) or hospital acquired pneumonia 
(HAP). HAP is defined as pneumonia that occurs 48 hours or more after hospital admission and which was 
not incubating (present within the patient) at hospital admission. You must have a strong suspicion for 
HAP in patients who have recently been discharged from hospital and those from high risk environments 
(e.g. nursing homes). 
30
HAP is associated with a higher mortality than CAP, and can be more resistant to standard antibiotic regimes. 
In addition, some pneumonias can be considered “atypical” (caused by uncommon microorgansims). An 
atypical pneumonia might be suspected in patients with a prolonged prodromal illness, a dry cough, or 
failure to respond to first line therapy. If you suspect your patient may have an atypical pneumonia it is 
always best to liaise with infection specialist services such as Microbiology.
Hospital Episode Statistics (HES) data suggest that we see a minimum of 450,000 - 700,000 episodes of 
pneumonia annually in England. Between 1.2% and 10% of adults admitted to hospital with community-
acquired pneumonia are managed in an intensive care unit, and for these patients the risk of dying is over 
30% (NICE, 2016). More than half of pneumonia-related deaths occur in people older than 84 years.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia is estimated to increase a hospital stay by about eight days and has a reported 
mortality rate ranging from 30–70% (NICE, 2017). There are variations in clinical management and outcomes 
across the UK.
VIRAL PNEUMONIA
AND SEPSIS
Although a significant majority of episodes of pneumonia seen outside of a pandemic are caused by bacteria, 
we need to recognise that other types of pathogen can cause pneumonia. These include fungi, particularly in 
immunocompromised people but also in people who’ve been unwell for some time or received multiple or 
prolonged courses of antibiotics.
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the condition of viral pneumonia as a consequence of SARS-CoV-2 
infection, leading to several million lives lost globally between 2020 and 2023 – though it would be remiss of 
us not to contrast this with the 11 million lives lost each year to sepsis around the world. Now that the virus 
is endemic, it is expected to continue to claim lives each year among vulnerable people albeit in much 
smaller numbers. Viral pneumonia is also seen as a consequence of infection with other viruses, as with ‘flu 
and other seasonal viruses, which cause many admissions to our Intensive Care Units each year.
Viral infection can also precipitate sepsis. Patients critically ill with COVID-19 have often required 
vasopressors in Intensive Care to counteract shock, or haemofiltration (a type of dialysis) to treat an acute 
kidney injury. These complications are due to the exaggerated immune response to infection – in other 
words, sepsis. This is almost certainly the reason why the use of immunomodulatory therapy in Intensive 
Care Units for these patients has shown outcome benefits, whereas antiviral therapies have not.
It is obvious that antibiotics are of no value in treating viral pneumonia, but they are often used at 
presentation partly because of uncertain diagnosis, and in part due to the fact that many patients with viral 
pneumonia develop secondary bacterial pneumonia. Some biomarkers – an example being procalcitonin, or 
PCT – are of limited value in helping distinguish between viral and bacterial infection, and are likely to be 
increasingly used in patients presenting with symptoms and signs of pneumonia to help determine whether 
or not to start antibiotics. The bottom line is that many of the interventions between sepsis as a 
consequence of viral pneumonia and bacterial pneumonia are identical, and the screening tools and Sepsis 6 
still have utility in patients with viral pneumonia pending decisions (often once results are back) to 
discontinue antibiotics.
31
• catheters should be inserted for the minimal time in the minimum number of patients (not for        
‘routine use’ and never for monitoring urine output in ambulatory patients)
• alternatives to an indwelling catheter should always be considered
• ensure proper aseptic technique for insertion and after care by properly trained individuals
• ensure adequate maintenance and regular checks of catheter functionURINARY TRACT 
INFECTION
What is it?
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are caused by the presence and multiplication of microorganisms in the 
urinary tract. A urinary tract infection can result in several clinical syndromes, including acute and chronic 
pyelonephritis (infection of the kidney and renal pelvis), cystitis (infection of the bladder), urethritis 
(infection of the urethra), epididymitis (infection of the epididymis) and prostatitis (infection of the prostate 
gland). Infection may spread to surrounding tissues (for example, perinephric abscess) or 
to the bloodstream.
How will the patient present?
Symptoms reported can include dysuria, frequency, offensive-smelling or discoloured urine, loin pain and 
haematuria. As a source of infection UTIs are responsible for approximately 20-25% of episodes of sepsis.
Diagnosis
Whilst sending urine and blood cultures will aid in the confirmation of a UTI, clinical suspicion based upon 
signs and symptoms is sufficient to initiate therapy. A positive urine dipstick in the absence of symptoms is 
NEVER a reason to start an antibiotic in non-pregnant patients. Common organisms causing urinary tract 
sepsis are gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli  and Klebsiella . It’s important to follow local antimicrobial 
guidelines (if in any doubt to seek antimicrobial advice) as these organisms can be antibiotic resistant. Most 
microbiologists would no longer recommend the routine use of trimethoprim due to increasing resistance.
Additional
The incidence of urinary tract infection is highest in young women. Most infections in adult men are 
complicated and related to abnormalities of the urinary tract, although some can occur spontaneously in 
otherwise healthy young men. HES data suggest that we see at least between 300,000 and 700,000 UTIs in 
England each year (code N39.0).
Catheter associated UTIs (CAUTIs) are a common cause of urinary infection and sepsis. The risks associated 
with catheter use must be judiciously balanced against the benefits on an individual patient basis: 
32
INTRA-ABDOMINAL 
SEPSIS
What is it?
Intra-abdominal infections are the third commonest cause of sepsis in the general population, account-ing 
for between 15 and 20% of cases. Intra-abdominal infections commonly arise from the biliary tract (e.g. 
cholangitis, cholecystitis) or as a complication of a perforation of the bowel (such as following an episode of 
diverticulitis or due to a bowel obstruction). When the bowel is very inflamed (for example, if it is ischaemic), 
bacteria can ‘translocate’ across the lining of the bowel into the bloodstream, precipitating sepsis in the 
absence of a perforation. There are between 30,000 and 50,000 cases of intra-abdominal infections each 
year in England.
In complicated intra-abdominal infections, the infection progresses from a single organ and affects 
the peritoneum, which can lead to the formation of intra-abdominal abscesses or diffuse peritonitis. 
Peritoneal contamination may result from mishandling of bowel contents during surgery, or from trauma or 
a spontaneous perforation (for example, appendicitis, perforated ulcer or diverticulitis).
How will the patient present?
Non-specific symptoms can be a sign that the patient is acutely unwell, such as fever, warm skin (from 
vasodilation) or altered mental state. More specific symptoms include abdominal pain, an inability to eat or 
drink, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea or constipation. Symptoms tend to be localised initially (such as in the 
right iliac fossa in appendicitis), but as peritonitis develops they tend to become generalised. An ‘acute 
abdomen’ is characterised by a rigid, often distended abdominal wall which is exquisitely tender to palpa-
tion. Patients may exhibit ‘guarding’, where they tense their muscles to prevent the palpating hand from 
pressing down; and ‘rebound tenderness’, where they might wince as the palpating hand is removed.
Diagnosis
Identifying intra-abdominal pathology accurately demands advanced assessment skills and often advanced 
modalities of imaging (CT or Ultrasound) – if intra-abdominal infection is suspected, early involvement of 
senior clinicians is essential. Early source control (removal of infection) is essential - ideally within 6 hours.
33
CELLULITIS
What is it?
Cellulitis is the most common of the group of infections known as ‘skin and soft tissue infections’ (SS-TIs), 
which also include the much rarer necrotising fasciitis. SSTIs together with bone and joint infections account 
for around 10-15% of episodes of sepsis. In 2016/17, there were between 110,000 and 250,000 episodes of 
sepsis due to cellulitis recorded in HES data.
How will the patient present?
There is likely to be tenderness, pain and swelling of the affected area, possibly following an injury or 
something as minor as an insect bite which have resulted in a breach of skin integrity. Cellulitis presents with 
rapidly spreading erythema, blistering, or even skin necrosis. The skin will feel hot. Although low-tech, 
carefully marking the margins of the erythema at presentation can help assessment of whether the initial 
antibiotic therapy is effective or not.
Diabetic patients are particularly prone to cellulitis, so it is important to check for a history of diabetes and 
perform blood glucose measurement in case of undiagnosed diabetes: you might spot a presentation of 
diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diagnosis
The patient will be diagnosed from their clinical presentation. Swabs taken for culture may confirm the 
organism involved – treatment will need to be started before results are available.
Additional
Beware of rapidly spreading cellulitis, or exquisite pain which is disproportionate to the clinical findings. This 
may be necrotizing fasciitis, a rare surgical emergency, which spreads along fascial planes with destruction of 
underlying tissue. It is commonly caused by mixed flora including haemolytic streptococci. This group of 
organisms release exotoxins which worsen the inflammatory response. 
Necrotising fasciitis has a high associated mortality and requires rapid and extensive debridement of the 
affected area in theatre as an emergency. If suspected, the most senior available member of the team should 
be consulted urgently.
A post-operative wound infection is recognised by pain, erythema, a purulent discharge or heat around the 
incision.  ‘Surgical Site Infection’ is defined as clinical evidence of an infection arising at a surgical incision site 
within 28 days of surgery. Poor healing may be the first marker of a lower grade infection. Post-operative 
wounds should be inspected daily and if there is evidence of discharge the clips or sutures should be 
removed and the potential space opened up using a sterile-gloved finger.  Antibiotics are not needed unless a 
patient is immunosuppressed or there is evidence of surrounding cellulitis.  Considera-tion should be given to 
the presence of a deeper infection – for example, an infected joint prosthesis or leaking abdominal 
anastomosis.
34
MENINGITIS
What is it?
It is important to differentiate between meningitis (inflammation of the meninges, usually due to infection) 
and ‘meningococcal septicaemia’, which should now be termed meningococcal sepsis. Each can exist without 
the other. Meningococcal sepsis, if present, carries a far worse prognosis than meningitis alone.
How will the patient present?
Symptoms of meningitis include headache, photophobia, vomiting, a stiff neck, drowsiness and occasionally 
focal neurological signs. Symptoms of meningococcal sepsis include some of the above plus rigors, cold hands 
and feet sometimes with severe pain, confusion and myalgia (muscle pain). Worsening neurological signs 
may indicate the development of cerebral oedema or hydrocephalus (raised pressure in the cranial cavity 
due to obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid flow). 
Particularly with meningococcal disease, a typical purpuric (like small bruises) rash may be noted in late 
stages, together with signs of circulatory failure – shock, cold and mottled peripheries, low urine output 
and reduced conscious level. 
The presence of a meningococcal rash is suggestive of meningococcal sepsis, but it can occur with other 
pathogens and in the absence of meningitis. Whatever the cause, the presence of a purpuric rash in the 
context of suspected infection is a medical emergency and demands the highest level of skill and experience 
available. It is inappropriate for a junior to manage such cases alone. 
Diagnosis
A lumbar puncture should be done after checking clotting and ensuring that there are no signs of raised 
intracranial pressure (perform fundoscopy as a minimum) in cases of suspected meningitis to assess white 
blood cell count and glucose level, as well as to identify causative organisms. If there is doubt about the 
diagnosis (a subarachnoid haemorrhage may have some similar clinical features) or any suspicion of raised 
intracranial pressure then a CT head may be required to ensure that it is safe to proceed to lumbar puncture. 
It is vital not to delay treatment. Intravenous antibiotics with activity against the Meningococcus ( Neisseria 
meningitidis ) such as cefotaxime/ceftriaxone should be given immediately. If sampling blood cultures is likely 
to cause delays and this cannot be avoided, then antibiotics should take priority. 
Additional
The incidence of meningitis has, thankfully, reduced dramatically due to vaccination programmes, and 
meningitis now accounts for fewer than 1% of episodes of sepsis. However, for the individual patient we 
must not let our guard down and retain a high index of suspicion.
35
LINE SEPSIS 
What is it?
Sepsis can be associated with the direct introduction of microbes into the blood stream through insertion, 
or subsequent colonisation by bacteria, of indwelling devices, and in particular vascular access devices (VADs).
How will the patient present?
The Visual Infusion Phlebitis (VIP) score can be used to monitor infusion sites. Sites should be inspected daily for pain, erythema and swelling.
Diagnosis
If line sepsis is suspected, the line should be removed, the tip cultured and if symptoms and signs of sepsis 
are present, treatment started.
Additional
Although line sepsis accounts for only around 1% of episodes, it is almost always avoidable. For every 
invasive device sited, a plan should be documented for its ongoing care and consideration for removal. At 
every opportunity, for every device, its removal should be considered. Central venous catheters (CVCs) are 
the VADs most commonly associated with bacteraemia (in terms of number of infective complications per 
100 devices inserted). Whilst routine changing of CVCs is no longer recommended, in a patient deteriorating 
without other obvious source of infection their removal should be considered. Peripheral venous lines are 
less commonly involved, particularly since the introduction of high impact care bundles for their insertion 
and management, though they remain a significant source of healthcare associated infection. IV site appears healthy
One of the following is evident
•
•Slight pain near IV site orSlight redness near IV site
Two of the following are evident
•••Pain at IV siteErythemaSwelling
All of the following signs are evident
•••Pain along path of cannulaErythemaInduration
All of the following are evident & extensive
••••Pain along path of cannulaErythemaIndurationPalpable venous cord
All of the following are evident & extensive
•••••Pain along path of cannulaErythemaIndurationPalpable venous cordPyrexiaNo signs of phlebitis OBSERVE CANNULA
Possible first signs OBSERVE CANNULA
Early stage of phlebitis RESITE CANNULA
Mid-stage of phlebitisRESITE CANNULACONSIDER TREATMENT
Advanced stage of phlebitis or start of thrombophlebitisRESITE CANNULACONSIDER TREATMENT
Advanced stage of thrombophlebitisINITIATE TREATMENT0
1
2
3
4
5LINE SEPSIS 
What is it?
Sepsis can be associated with the direct introduction of microbes into the bloodstream through insertion (or 
subsequent colonisation by bacteria) of indwelling devices, in particular vascular access devices (VADs).
How will the patient present?
The Visual Infusion Phlebitis (VIP) score can be used to monitor infusion sites. Sites should be inspected 
daily for pain, erythema and swelling .
36
OSTEOMYELITIS
What is it?
Osteomyelitis is an infection of the bone. It can be caused by direct bone infection (e.g. injury with a foreign 
object, like standing on a nail) or by spread of infection from another part of the body via the bloodstream.
How will the patient present?
The affected bone will be painful and there may be erythema, swelling and tenderness of the overlying skin. 
However, osteomyelitis can be subtle and is often a diagnosis made late following the exclusion of other 
infective sources.
Diagnosis
This is from a combination of the clinical presentation, findings from X-ray/imaging, blood cultures and if 
necessary bone biopsy.
Additional
Osteomyelitis is a rare cause of sepsis. It can however be very difficult to treat, and may take many weeks 
of antibiotic therapy. People with diabetes who have foot injuries/ chronic leg ulcers are particularly at risk 
of this condition.SEPTIC ARTHRITIS 
What is it?
This is inflammation of a joint (the synovial membranes or fluid within a joint) caused by infection .
How will the patient present?
Symptoms of a joint infection include severe pain (particularly on movement), swelling, erythema and heat 
around the affected joint. A history of arthritis can often be elicited. It is important to ask about trauma or 
recent instrumentation to the joint such as arthroscopic surgery.
Diagnosis
Joint aspiration will help to establish the diagnosis and identify the causative organism. Any aspirate should 
be sent for culture and microscopy together with blood cultures. X-rays or other imaging will be required to 
establish the extent of any joint destruction.
Additional
Any antibiotic therapy must cover Staphylococci and achieve good joint penetration – intravenous 
benzylpenicillin and flucloxacillin being a good initial choice. In cases where a patient is physiologically well 
(no evidence of sepsis) then a joint aspiration may be beneficial prior to starting anti-microbial therapy. It is 
important to liaise with orthopaedic surgeons and/or rheumatologists. In many cases a joint washout by 
arthroscopy is warranted (source control), and should be completed within the first six hours (and ideally 
sooner). In the recovery phase, Physiotherapy will be essential to regain joint function.
37
Multiple sets of blood cultures from different sites are mandatory. These may take several days to grow 
an organism. An echocardiogram should be requested to look for vegetations, but absence of these does 
not exclude the diagnosis. Trans-oesophageal echocardiography (TOE) may be necessary.
Additional
It is mandatory to involve Cardiology early, as the patient may deteriorate and may require urgent valve 
replacement surgery. Long durations of antibiotic treatments are typically necessary. Liaise with your 
microbiology team at an early stage.
SUMMARY
• A good history and examination taking into account the patient’s risk factors and clinical findings will
identify the source of sepsis in a majority of patients – it is rare to have to wait for confirmatory tests
before commencing treatment.
• Sepsis is a multi-disciplinary condition – enlist expert help early and seek senior advice if ever unsure or
considering the diagnosis.
• The importance of consultation with microbiologists locally who will be aware of pathogens and
resistance patterns in your own institutions cannot be over emphasised. First-line empiric treatments for
common infections will usually be included in microbiology guidelines on hospital intranet sites.
• Consideration of the likely source of infection is an important part of sepsis management. Selection of a
broad spectrum antibiotic regimen for ‘sepsis of unknown source’ should be only following a process of
exclusion, never as a ‘catch-all’.ENDOCARDITIS 
What is it?
Endocarditis is infection of the inner lining of the heart (the endocardium) and particularly the heart valves. 
This is not a common condition to present acutely as sepsis, but should be considered if a patient with sepsis 
has no other obvious source of infection or fails to respond to therapy,especially if there is a history of heart 
valve disease or rheumatic fever in childhood and if they currently or have ever injected intravenous drugs.
How will the patient present?
Patients might present with symptoms of emboli thrown off from the infected growth on the heart valve, 
including multiple pulmonary emboli for right-sided lesions and the more common cerebral or peripheral 
emboli in left-sided disease. More common symptoms include dyspnoea, weight loss, and swinging fevers. 
Heart murmurs may be significant, particularly if they are new or changing. 
Splinter haemorrhages on the nails may be a feature (but are often innocent due to trauma but are not 
necessary for diagnosis.  In sub-acute endocarditis, splenomegaly may occur. The patient can appear 
cachectic, and may be mistakenly thought to have a malignancy. They may have signs of heart failure such as 
raised jugular venous pressure, peripheral oedema and pulmonary congestion. 
Diagnosis
38
THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
OF SEPSIS
39
WHAT HAPPENS 
IN SEPSIS01
Sepsis is a collection of physiological responses to infection, which involves the immune system and the 
coagulation cascade. It is characterised by a process known as inflammation.
Inflammation in response to infection is largely triggered by receptors in the lining of blood vessels (the 
endothelium), which detect products on the cell walls of pathogens. The response is from the immune 
system – this first line of defence then sets off a cascade of reactions. In sepsis, these reactions become 
dysregulated.Sepsis is a life-threatening condition arising when an abnormal response to infection causes organ 
dysfunction. Sepsis can be caused by any bug, including bacteria, fungi or viruses. We refer to these 
disease-causing microorganisms as pathogens.
It is not clear why some people develop sepsis in response to an infection and others don’t. Several 
factors are likely to be at play, including:
• The type of pathogen causing the infection – some are more prone to triggering an aggressive
response than others (they’re more ‘virulent’)
• The number of pathogens present, and where in the body they are
• Individual or ‘host’ factors: these are determined by both genetics and by acquired conditions,
which may predispose to a disordered immune response.
40
WHY DOES 
THIS HAPPEN?02
It’s because of the immune system. The body ‘senses’ that injury has occurred, which it can fix by mobilising 
white blood cells to the site of injury to neutralise any pathogens. Fibrin and platelets also move to the site 
of injury to help clot the blood and stop bleeding. In sepsis, it is helpful to consider this response occurring 
across the whole body, which can be described using the various components of inflammation:
VasodilationCapillary LeakageAmplification
Diagram: The effects of inf ammation
i. Vasodilatation
A first step in inflammation is to increase blood flow to the affected area. This is necessary to mobilise white 
blood cells, fibrin and platelets to where they are needed. This response is largely achieved through 
vasodilatation, in which blood vessels enlarge to get more ‘good stuff’ to the damaged tissue. This vasodi-
lation is what causes redness and warmth to the affected area, and explains why patients with sepsis may 
initially have warm peripheries. 
41
ii.Capillary leakage
In addition to vasodilation, capillaries become ‘leaky.’ This is an essential part of the response process, as the 
potential pathogens are not restricted to the insides of blood vessels. The ‘good stuff’ needs to get out to the 
interstitial tissues where it is needed to fight off infection. This part of the inflammatory response process is 
what causes swelling. With capillary leakage, patients may appear oedematous, have a runny nose, dizziness, 
diarrhoea and/or vomiting.
iii.Amplification
In acute inflammation, a whole host of ‘mediator’ molecules, or ‘cytokines’ are released, some of which are 
briefly described below with their functions. This is quite a simplistic list but is included as a starter. A full 
description of the pathophysiology of sepsis is beyond the scope of this manual:
Mediator molecules Function
Nitric oxideNitric oxide causes and maintains vasodilation. This 
helps to make capillaries more permeable (‘leaky’)
BradykininBradykinin is responsible for the pain at the site of inflammation (preventing us from damaging ourselves further), and is also involved in vasodilatation and making capillaries more permeable
Complement proteinsComplement proteins act directly to neutralise pathogens, mobilise white blood cells and amplify the immune response
ThrombinThrombin helps clot formation by turning fibrinogen into fibrin, and is involved in nitric oxide production
InterleukinsInterleukins are a complex group of proteins which help white blood cells to function, attract them to the area and modulate inflammation – some cause inflam -
mation, some damp it down
Tumour Necrosis FactorTumour Necrosis Factor (TNF) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine
42
The role that systems, pathways and cytokines play in the first phase of inflammation is still not fully 
understood. However, as the above table demonstrates, inflammation is mediated by a complex set of 
molecules which are all inter-related. It is therefore inevitable that processes will go wrong and it is 
understandable why sepsis can have such a rapid progression and poor prognosis.
In sepsis, the delicate balance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, which should 
regulate the process, becomes disordered. Sepsis is inflammation ‘gone bad’.
So far, we’ve described the body’s ‘first line of defence’ to potential infection, which is mostly mediated by 
proteins and components of the vascular system. This is largely known as the ‘humoral’ component of the 
immune response, but to neutralise complex infections requires a cellular component too.
White blood cells are known as leukocytes, and act to neutralise pathogens. Leukocytes are also required to 
‘remember’ individual pathogens, to act more quickly should the same pathogen infect again. The ‘inbuilt’ 
immune system is known as the ‘innate' system; the bit with memory the ‘adaptive’ immune system, though 
this distinction is not important here. Leukocytes are mobilised to the infective site by cytokines which 
‘signal’ that they are needed.  This pathway also tells the bone marrow to produce more leukocytes.
There are a number of different types of leukocytes. Neutrophils act by releasing ‘granules’ which contain 
enzymes with which to attack pathogens. Others, such as monocytes, ‘engulf’ pathogens and destroy them 
internally. B cells make antibodies, which can bind to pathogens and accelerate their destruction. White 
blood cells are the second line of defence, and are vital to ensuring a sustained attack on invading 
pathogens.
The effect of sepsis on organ systems can be described using an ABCDE approach:
A. Airway
The airway is not specifically affected by sepsis, unless infection arises due to infection of the throat or soft 
tissues of the neck. 
A patient with a low Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) or Alert, Voice, Pain, Unresponsive (AVPU score) score might 
be at risk of developing an airway problem; particularly if the GCS drops below 9, which approxi-mates to an 
AVPU of ‘P’.
B. Breathing
The lung is involved early in the inflammatory process. Often, a raised respiratory rate is the first sign that a 
patient is deteriorating. 
Fluids and proteins leak into the interstitial tissues causing swelling and decreased oxygen transfer across the 
alveoli. The protective layer of surfactant which helps lungs to move freely starts to disappear, leading to 
decreased ‘compliance’ of the lungs (they become stiff) and increased vulnerability to infection. Later, 
fibrosis may develop, although this won’t affect the early stages. However, particularly with patients 
presenting late and those in multi-organ failure, the patient may deteriorate further and develop an Acute 
Lung Injury or the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS).
43
In essence, these processes mean that the lungs are stiff and cannot transfer oxygen and carbon dioxide in 
and out of the blood as easily. Patients will struggle to breathe, and will tend to take quick, shallow breaths. 
This fast respiratory rate is known as tachypnoea, and is often the first noticeable sign that a patient is 
deteriorating. This mechanism is the body’s way of meeting the oxygen demand of organs, muscles and 
tissues, as a result of a low circulating volume despite the stiff lungs. It cannot be sustained for long, 
particularly in the elderly, as it’s hard work. 
The respiratory rate may also increase in ‘compensation’ for a metabolic acidosis – if the pH of the blood falls 
because the tissues aren’t getting enough oxygen, the body will try to compensate for this by breathing 
faster to blow off carbon dioxide (CO 2), since this prevents it from dissolving to form more acid. 
Mechanical ventilation might be necessary in patients with respiratory failure. A pulse oximeter might show 
low oxygen saturations, and a blood gas might show a low partial pressure of oxygen (PaO 2).  The PaCO 2 
might be low because of compensation for a metabolic acidosis, but in later stages may rise as the lungs 
begin to fail to clear carbon dioxide efficiently or the patient begins to tire.
The below table shows arterial blood gas results from a patient suffering from sepsis. Whilst it is beyond the 
scope of this manual to fully explain blood gas results, a brief description is given next to each value. 
Test Value Normal values
pH 7.23 7.35-7.45
PaO29.85 11-13 kPa
PaCO23.2 4.7-6.0 kPa
BE -16.7 +/– 2
HCO3- 12.6 22-26 mEq/l
Lactate 6.2 <2 mmol/l
Chest X-ray showing pneumonia and ARDS
44
pH
The pH determines whether or not the patient is acidotic (a low pH) or alkalotic (a high pH). The 
value given here indicates that the patient is acidotic. Using the other tests, we can determine if this 
acidosis is a result of respiratory or metabolic imbalances.
PaO 2
This test tells us how well oxygenated the patient is. The patient will either have hypoxaemia 
(low PaO 2), normal oxygenation or hyperoxaemia (high PaO 2). The given value indicates that the 
patient is hypoxic. Hypoxia is common in sepsis due to the inflammatory process described above 
compromising lung function.
PaCO 2
The PaCO 2 will help to determine whether or not the acidotic pH is the result of an imbalance in the 
respiratory or the metabolic system. A high PaCO 2 indicates that a patient is hypoventilating, and on 
its own would cause an acidosis. Rarely, a high PaCO 2 can occur to compensate for a metabolic 
alkalosis – this would not be a typical feature of sepsis. A low PaCO 2, such as the value given here, 
indicates that the patient is hyperventilating, and on its own would cause an alkalosis. More 
commonly in patients with sepsis, a low PaCO 2 is caused by the body’s attempt to compensate for 
the metabolic acidosis which arises because of the relative lack of oxygen supply to the tissues.
As the PaCO 2 is low and the pH is low (acidosis), this would suggest that the cause of the 
abnormalities is a metabolic acidosis. The patient is trying to compensate by breathing faster, but this 
is only partially effective – they remain acidotic. Looking at the bicarbonate (HCO3-), we can see that 
the value is low. This tells us that the patient has metabolic acidosis with partial respiratory com-
pensation. In the context of the patient with sepsis, this information tells us that organ damage is 
likely – the sense is that the respiratory and metabolic systems are failing. 
CO 2 binds with water (H 2O) in the body to form H 2CO 3 (carbonic acid). The formation of H 2CO 3 acts to 
decrease pH, and therefore is used as part of ‘homeostasis’ (the body’s way of maintaining 
equilibrium) to keep the pH within normal ranges. In this case, the patient is ‘blowing off’ their CO 2; 
so the patient has less circulating carbonic acid. This causes the blood to become more alkalotic. In 
instances where the pH is imbalanced due to a metabolic source, the respiratory system 
compensates by either retaining or ‘blowing off’ CO 2. 
Physically, we will see an increase or decrease in the patient’s ventilation in order to help the body 
achieve this compensation to aid the pH to return closer to its normal range. The patient with 
metabolic acidosis may present with Kussmaul’s respiration (rapid and deep) as they attempt to 
normalise pH. When considering PaCO 2, it is therefore important to consider the pH. If the PaCO 2 and 
the pH are moving in opposite directions, the imbalance will be respiratory in origin. If the PaCO 2 and 
pH are going in the same direction, the imbalance will be metabolic in origin.
BE
A Base Excess (BE) which is very low demonstrates that there is low amount of HCO3- in the patient’s
blood. This decrease in HCO3- further suggests that the patient has either a metabolic acidosis or is
attempting to compensate for a respiratory alkalosis. In sepsis, it’s highly likely to be the former.
HCO3- (bicarbonate)
This result is low. As the pH shows an acidosis, the acid-base disturbance is likely to be a result of 
metabolic acidosis – that is, the disturbance is being caused by metabolic disturbance. Most likely, 
the cause of this is insufficient oxygen supply to the tissues and organs, leading to anaerobic 
respiration by the cells. 
HCO3- is a base which ‘mops up’ hydrogen (H+) ions. If the HCO3- is low, then there are more free H+
ions. This increase in free H+ ions causes the patient to be acidotic (have a low pH). HCO3- should be
considered in the context of the PaCO 2 when analysing blood gas results. 
45
If the results are both going in the same direction, then one system is working to compensate 
the other. If the results are going in opposite directions, then both respiratory and metabolic 
imbalances are occurring.
Lactate
Lactate can be quite confusing for many people to understand and interpret, and is often 
debated in the management of sepsis. Lactate is often associated with tissue hypoxia, and whilst 
lactate does not diagnose sepsis, it can tell us how ‘bad’ the circulation and tissue oxygenation in 
sepsis is. 
Lactate is a normal waste product of anaerobic breakdown of tissue glucose – and lactate can 
actually be helpful. The heart is able to use it as an energy source in times of distress. In sepsis, 
patients struggle to get rid of this waste product as quickly as it accumulates, hence a rise in 
lactate. We should be concerned about anyone with sepsis and a lactate greater than 2 mmol/L, 
as the mortality rate of the patient with sepsis with a high lactate is significantly higher. If the 
initially high lactate falls with adequate fluid resuscitation to normal levels, this is associated 
with better outcomes than if it remains elevated.
Circulating mediators such as interleukins 
and nitric oxide cause vasodilatation, 
particularly in arterioles, and precapillary 
sphincter dysfunction. This leads to loss of 
systemic vascular resistance and 
contributes to hypotension. Additionally, 
regulation of blood flow to organs is 
impaired leading to hypoperfusion, shock 
and ultimately organ failure. The effects of inadequate respiration are compounded by a reduced blood flow to the lungs in the later 
stages of sepsis, when the circulation begins to fail. This causes a ‘dead space’, where bits of lung are 
ventilated with oxygen-enriched air, but are not perfused with blood. The blood flowing out of these ‘dead 
space’ areas will not have been oxygenated, and, although it will mix with blood from oxygenated areas, 
there will be an inevitable further drop in oxygen saturations. Receptors called ‘chemoreceptors’ found in 
the carotid and aortic arteries will sense low oxygen levels. To compensate for these low oxygen levels 
(hypoxia), further tachypnoea will occur. This compensation is exhausting for patients to maintain, and will 
cause patients to look and feel very ill and lethargic. They may even express that they ‘I feel like I might die.’
C.Circulation
As described above, sepsis causes vasodilatation and capillary leakage.
The increased ‘space’ in the circulation caused by vasodilatation means that the same volume of blood is 
occupying a much larger space. This is called a relative lack of blood volume or ‘relative hypovolaemia’.
Leaky capillaries allow proteins, solutes and water to leave the circulation, making the blood volume smaller. 
This compounds the ‘relative hypovolaemia’ with an ‘absolute hypovolaemia’. Absolute hypovolaemia is a 
reduction in circulating volume relating to blood or plasma loss - there is now less blood occupy-ing a bigger 
space.
46
The immediate effect of these changes is a fall in blood pressure. Blood pressure is a product of the amount 
of blood pumped out by the heart (cardiac output, CO) and the ‘tone’ of the blood vessels, which is termed 
‘systemic vascular resistance (SVR)’.
The equation for blood pressure
In sepsis we have a drop in SVR which will mean the blood pressure falls unless the patient can adequately 
increase their cardiac output. The body detects this drop in blood pressure via pressure receptors called 
‘baroreceptors’. These receptors trigger the sympathetic nervous system to increase the heart rate and the 
strength at which the heart pumps, which is further raised by the body releasing catecholamines, such as 
adrenaline – they attempt to increase the CO to compensate for the fall in SVR.
This rise in heart rate is known as ‘compensatory tachycardia’ and is the body’s attempt to compensate for the 
low blood pressure. In essence, the body is working incredibly hard to pump what (relatively) little blood there 
is around the body in order to get oxygen-rich blood to organs and tissues.
Early in the progression of sepsis, the patient may look remarkably well, despite a low blood pressure. They 
may present with warm peripheries and often normal capillary refill times. Later, as the circulating volume 
becomes depleted (reducing venous return to the heart) and the compensatory mechanisms be-come 
exhausted, the circulation begins to fail and the patient will look much worse; with cool peripheries, often a 
prolonged capillary refill time and signs of organ dysfunction. It is critical to ensure that we identify patients 
before they reach this stage! It is important to remember that some patient groups (such as children) can 
maintain their blood pressure for a long time before very rapidly decompensating.BP = CO X SVRCrystalloid molecule, normally kept in the blood stream in normal capillary 
function, but can escape when tissue damage occurs in sepsis
Colloid molecule, more likely to be retained in the blood stream despite
capillary damage
47
Calculating Capillary Refill Time (CRT)
CRT is a quick and useful test to determine effective and efficient blood flow around the body .
The circulation, in terms of cardiac output or ‘flow’ of blood can begin to fail for two main reasons:
1. The reduced circulating volume caused by capillary leakage results in less blood returning to the 
heart. This ‘reduced venous return’ means that the heart is relatively empty before it contracts. If 
there is little blood to pump, even a strong heart won’t be able to generate a good cardiac output
2. Sepsis can affect the heart’s function, particularly during diastole, meaning that the heart cannot 
‘relax’ properly and therefore cannot fill. As a result, cardiac output falls. Not only does blood 
pressure fall further, but blood flow to organs will diminish.
Adequate filling
Cardiac muscle contracts by the ‘walking’ of actin filaments 
over myosin filaments in response to calcium release. When 
the heart muscle is adequately stretched by ‘filling’, there is plenty of room for molecular movement and contraction is strong. Myosin filament (does not move)
Actin filament (does move)How to:
Apply pressure to centre of patient’s sternum using 
your thumb, for 5 seconds. Peripheral capillary refill is 
not very reliable in the very sick patient, and so CRT 
should be measured centrally.
When the practitioner’s thumb is removed, the 
patient’s skin should return from white to its normal 
colour in under 3 seconds. A CRT of 3 seconds or 
more is cause for concern as the patient is not being 
adequately perfused.
48
Myosin filament (does not move)
Myosin filament (does not move)Actin filament (does move)
Actin filament (does move)Underfilled
OverfilledWhen the heart is empty, the actin and myosin have little room 
to move over each other. Contraction is weak and stroke vol -
ume, and therefore cardiac output is limited.
Here the heart is overfilled to the extend that there is no 
overlap between actin and myosin - the filaments can’t ‘grip’ 
each other. Contraction is extremely weak and cardiac failure 
results.
Organs rely upon flow of blood as well as pressure. Consider a patient with congestive cardiac failure: they 
might have a good blood pressure, but if their cardiac output is low they will appear grey and clammy. Blood 
is flowing so slowly through the organs that the cells are sucking every available molecule of oxygen from 
every molecule of haemoglobin, and this is still not fulfilling their metabolic needs. Add in the hypoxia 
described above, and you can see that tissue hypoxia is one of the main reasons that organs begin to fail in 
sepsis.
If these two factors (low blood pressure and reduced cardiac output) weren’t enough, the smallest beds of 
blood vessels (known as the microcirculation) do not work properly in sepsis. In healthy patients, blood is 
diverted by the microcirculation to the cells that need it the most; however in sepsis this regulation fails. 
Furthermore, the state of accelerated coagulation we see in sepsis causes tiny blood clots to form in the 
smallest capillaries. This creates further problems insomuch that the vessels which were working are now 
frequently blocked .
49
CLINICAL PRACTICE TIP
Sepsis can be described as a critical imbalance between oxygen supply 
and demand for the reasons described above. Serum lactate levels tend 
to rise in response to tissue hypoxia and the higher the level of lactate, 
the poorer the patient outcome is likely to be. The rate at which lactate 
improves following initiation of fluid resuscitation is indicative of survival.
The physiological changes to the respiratory and cardiovascular systems seen in sepsis can affect any organ, 
and result in multi-organ failure. The lungs and brain are described in this chapter, but consider any organ at 
risk. Sepsis can affect the skin and soft tissues, causing ischaemia and loss of digits or limbs (although this is 
relatively rare). The liver may show signs of an ischaemic ‘hit’, with rising liver enzymes and other effects, 
including a relative lack of production of clotting factors by the liver increasing the Inter-national Normalised 
Ratio (INR). We have already said that sepsis is a hypercoagulable state, but as more and more small clots 
form, clotting factors become diminished. It is due, but not limited to, the diminished clotting factors and a 
deranged INR that bleeding can result. This ‘consumptive coagulopathy’ can lead to a condition called 
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulopathy (DIC).
Blood flow to the kidneys is preserved over a range of blood pressures, typically quoted as over a range of 
systolic blood pressures from 50 to 150 mmHg, although this protective mechanism is less effective in acute 
illness. Thus, with a falling blood pressure, flow to kidneys is preserved to an extent (green curve). This is 
known as 'autoregulation'.
Renal blood flow is related to cardiac output, however, in an almost linear fashion: as cardiac output falls, 
so does renal blood flow and therefore so does urine output (gold line). Patients with sepsis in the UK are 
largely cared for outside the Critical Care Unit, so cardiac output monitoring is not routine. It is important 
for practitioners to appreciate that urine output is a fantastic window for assessing the patient’s circu-latory 
system: if the urine output falls, it is likely that cardiac output has also fallen and urgent action is required. 
Acute kidney injury is common in sepsis, and associated with worse patient outcomes. It is therefore 
essential to monitor urine output closely.
50
1. Cortisol activates enzymes which are involved in hepatic gluconeogenesis (creation of glucose, or sugar, 
by the liver), and also inhibit the ability of the peripheral tissues to uptake glucose
2. Adrenaline and noradrenaline activate hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, consequently 
increasing blood sugar levels
3. As the body is fighting infection, an inflammatory substance called C-reactive protein is released in 
order to combat the infection. C-reactive protein, however, induces insulin resistance, meaning that the 
body cannot effectively use its own insulin. The result of this will again be a raised blood sugar.D. Disability
As blood flow to the brain reduces, so conscious levels can be affected. This can present as confusion, 
drowsiness, slurred speech, agitation, anxiety, or a decreased level of consciousness. 
Blood sugar is normally slightly elevated in sepsis, meaning that it is unlikely to be responsible for a reduced 
conscious level. When the body enters a state of shock, the patient’s fight or flight response is triggered. 
Simply put, when the brain identifies a stress on the body, adrenaline, noradrenaline and cortisol are 
released in order to help the body ‘fight’. 
With the release of these hormones; three things are now happening:
A further consideration is that when the body enters a state of shock, in order to preserve the internal 
organs, the body pulls its circulating volume into its core. The brain is the only internal organ not to sit in the 
core of the body. So, when the body pulls its circulating volume into its core, the brain does not receive 
adequate oxygen to function. 
E. Exposure
Recent evidence suggests that a high temperature might be a protective response to sepsis, with patients 
with higher temperatures appearing to fare better. Clinical opinion suggests that hypothermia below 
36.0oC is a sinister development associated with worse patient outcome, although this is not conclusively 
proven.
A high temperature occurs due to a response to infection by the hypothalamus, essentially sending it into 
disarray. Pathogens, particularly if bacterial, will produce pyrogens which act on the hypothalamus to 
‘reset’ the way in which it regulates temperature.
A low or normal temperature may occur because of heat loss, due to vasodilatation, or due to the patient 
having taken anti-pyretic medication, for example paracetamol. We do not recommend the use of 
paracetamol to 'treat' high temperature, other than if the patient is symptomatic (for example, with 
rigors). Theoretically, pyrexia is a protective and adaptive phenomenon, and it might be that trying to 
dampen this 'normal' response is harmful.
51
CONCLUSION
The pathophysiology of sepsis is a very complex topic. This chapter has touched on the brief principles, but 
further reading is advised for practitioners to gain more depth of understanding into this multifaceted 
subject.
The most important messages to take from this chapter are:
• Sepsis is complex, and can affect any system of the body. Symptoms may be subtle, or not as we would
expect, but any concern should be given immediate attention.
• Ensure that all test results are read and acted upon. Some test results, particularly those obtained from
blood gases, may only show minimal changes, however these subtle changes could be a result of
compensation, and need interpretation by those familiar with sepsis and blood gas analysis.
• The higher the patient’s lactate level climbs, the worse their prognosis becomes.
• Sepsis is life-threatening and time-critical. By assessing patients in a systematic way (for example using
the ABCDE approach), life-threatening problems should be found quickly and treatment can be
delivered promptly. It is easy to panic if you find something wrong or ‘not quite right’ with any patient.
The important thing if you do not understand the pathophysiology behind what is happening is to
escalate care to the appropriate team members who can provide timely treatment.
52
THE
 SEPSIS  6
53
OVERVIEW
1. Delivering the Sepsis 6 within one hour is one of the most  effective life-saving treatments in medicine
2. For some
 patients, each hour’s delay in giving antibiotics increases mortality. For others, significant
delays are likely to adversely impact on outcome
3. The Sepsis 6 includes strategies to control the source of infection, and to measure and restore
circulation and oxygen delivery
4. Always assess the impact of your treatment and adjust accordingly
The Sepsis 6, and the rationale behind each element, is described in the annotated version of our 
Screening Tool below:
Action (complete 
ALL within 1 hour)           Time Initials Why we do this
1.Ensure senior clinician attends
ST3+, or equivalent senior nurseSepsis is a complex condition. 
Experience is essential to deliver the right care and confirm diagnosis
There’s a critical imbalance 
between oxygen supply & demand in sepsis. Correcting low saturations helps to reduce tissue hypoxia
Laboratory and POC tests 
help stratify risk & identify 
causative pathogen 
allowing more targeted 
antibiotic therapy
To control the source of 
infection, reducing the stimulus to the immune system
Hypovolaemia (absolute & 
relative) contributes to shock in sepsis restoring volume can help correct
Sepsis is a dynamic state. Urine 
output and lactate can help guide fluid therapy and determine need for ITU referral2. Give oxygen if required
Start if saturations less than 92%. Aim for saturations of 94-98%. If at risk of hypercarbia use target range of 88-92%
3.Obtain IV access, take bloods
Include blood cultures, glucose, lactate, FBC, 
U&Es, CRP, LFTs , Clotting.  Consider lumbar 
puncture/ other samples as indicated
4.Give IV antibiotics  and
consider source control
Maximum dose broad spectrum therapy.  
Consider local policy, allergies, antivi rals
5.Give IV fluids
Give up to 20 ml/kg fluid in divided boluses. Give 
more if indicated  - seek senior advice. Use 
lactate to help guide further fluid therapy 
6. Monitor
Use NEWS2.  Measure urine output- may require 
catheter. Repeat lactate at least hourly if initial lactate elevated or clinical condition changes
54
INTRODUCTION 
Sepsis is characterised by organ dysfunction mediated, to a large extent, by a relative lack of oxygen to the cells.
In this chapter, we will see how applying the Sepsis 6 works to minimise this by restoring the 
circulation, assessing risk, monitoring the effect of treatment and switching off the infective trigger. 
The Sepsis  6 is a set of six  (!) tasks which  can be performed by junior health professionals working together as a 
team – all it takes is the knowledge, the will and basic prescribing and practical skills. It is simple and effective, and 
has been shown to greatly increase a patient’s chances of survival if delivered within the first hour. 
The National Institute for Health and Social Care Excellence (NICE), in the NG51 Guideline on Sepsis, recognises 
that these elements of care are those with the greatest evidence base in the early resuscitation phase of 
sepsis. 
The Sepsis 6 should be delivered as quickly as possible, but for the sickest 
patients with Red Flag Sepsis always within the first hour following 
recognition of sepsis.
SENIOR HELPSTEP
01
Sepsis is a complex condition which can evolve rapidly, and which may require consultation with multiple 
disciplines including infection specialists (microbiology/ infectious diseases), radiologists, surgeons and 
Critical Care. Whilst every health professional has a key role in identifying and managing sepsis, experience 
can help determine the best care and facilitate and coordinate excellent communication between teams in 
order to deliver seamless and effective collaborative care.
55
In sepsis, a critical imbalance exists between oxygen demand by the tissues and its supply. Oxygen delivery is 
compromised due to a combination of reduced blood pressure and possibly flow, tissue oedema and 
abnormal flow of blood through capillary beds. Demand of the cells for oxygen is increased as the 
hypermetabolic state means cells are crying out for oxygen. This means you will need to do what you can to 
maximise oxygen delivery to your patient’s tissues. 
We recommend that you start oxygen therapy if the patient’s O 2 saturations are less than 92%, aiming for 
target O 2 saturations of 94-98%. If your patient is at risk of hypercarbia (see below) aim instead for 
saturations of  88-92%.
Any patient who is critically ill – for example, who is shocked or unconscious – should immediately receive 
high flow oxygen at 15 litres per minute via a non-rebreathe facemask with reservoir bag. If the patient is not 
in immediate danger, evidence suggests that for most patients we should use ‘just enough’ oxygen to 
achieve targeted oxygen saturations of 94-98%.
Oxygen is transported in two forms:
•The amount of oxygen bound to haemoglobin – this is really important (98% of total oxygen carried)
•The amount of oxygen dissolved directly in the blood – this is relatively unimportant (2% of total
oxygen carried)
Bound to haemoglobinDissolved in plasmaPreservation of antimicrobials is critical to mankind’s future. Not only can senior clinicians exercise 
judgment in determining appropriate initial antimicrobial therapy, but they can also make rapid decisions 
around appropriate tests and source control and ensure these are acted upon quickly. Experience can also 
help in evaluating for, and ruling in or out, sepsis mimics.
Enlisting senior help early is not a new recommendation, but it was included in the Sepsis 6 for the first time 
from 2019.
GIVE OXYGEN
IF REQUIREDSTEP02
56
The only practical way to maximise oxygen content is to ensure that 
there’s enough haemoglobin to carry oxygen, and the haemoglobin is well saturated with oxygen. Later, once bloods are back, severe anaemia (defined as [Hb] <7 g/dl, or <8 g/dl if the patient has severe cardiac or respiratory disease), should be corrected using blood transfusions. Transfusion is unnecessary, wasteful and possibly harmful in patients with mild to moderate anaemia. “There are a few equations coming up to explain why we do what we do. Rest assured you do not need to 
memorise them for clinical practice!
Oxygen delivery to the tissues is governed by two things: how much oxygen is in the blood, and how much 
blood is flowing to the tissue or organ. Writing this as an equation gives:
O2 delivery = O2 content of blood x cardiac output
The oxygen content of blood is then given by this equation:
Oxygen content (measured in ml) = [1.34 x [Hb] x % SpO2] + 0.003 x PaO2
Let’s break down this equation to see how it relates to the Sepsis 6. The first bit of good news: you can 
essentially ignore the ‘0.003 x PaO 2’ bit (which, as we’ve said above, relates to the amount of oxygen which  is 
dissolved in the blood rather than bound to haemoglobin), as the dissolved portion is tiny.
[Hb] is the concentration of haemoglobin in g/dL (note some hospitals use g/L). 
Each gram of haemoglobin can carry up to a maximum of 4 molecules of oxygen which equates to 1.34ml, 
which is where that number comes from. You can’t change this number! If the SpO 2 is lower, it means there 
is less oxygen than this bound to each haemoglobin molecule.
The SpO 2 (oxygen saturation of haemoglobin) is the amount of oxygen bound to haemoglobin as a  
percentage of the total amount of oxygen that could potentially be bound to haemoglobin. This is the bit you 
can fix quickly by giving a little oxygen. We used to advise that high flow oxygen be given routinely to 
patients with sepsis, but this is now only the case in children or those adults who are already critically ill. In 
other words, the SpO 2 measures how ‘full’ of oxygen our haemoglobin is.
So we can simplify to:
Oxygen content ≈ [Hb] x SpO2
57
The effect of a high or low PaO2 beyond its effect on the saturations is very limited. This means that the 
SpO2 gives you all the information you are likely to need about whether or not PaO2 is adequate for your 
patient.
You only really need to specifically check PaO2 on an arterial blood gas if you cannot get a reliable % 
saturation trace with the pulse oximeter: e.g. the patient is peripherally shut down or in the presence of 
certain arrhythmias, carbon monoxide poisoning etc. 
Of course, you will need blood gas results for other reasons, such as measuring lactate, pH, PaCO2 etc. It is 
unusual in the early stages of sepsis for an otherwise healthy patient to have difficulty clearing carbon 
dioxide, but later, particularly if an acute lung injury develops or if the underlying infection is a pneumo-
nia, this can become a problem as the patient tires.
There are some factors beyond the PaO2 which play a role in determining the SpO2, which you can read 
about below the graph if you are interested but this isn’t essential!Oxygen content (measured in ml) = [1.34 x [Hb] x % SpO2] + 0.003 x PaO2
The relationship
between PaO2 and SpO2
The exact shape of this curve will vary with other factors:
High temperature, low pH and high PaCO2 are all potential markers of high metabolic activity and oxygen 
demands, and produce a shift in the curve to the right. This shift encourages haemoglobin to unbind from 
oxygen more readily, which releases more oxygen into the tissues even when the oxygen content is low. This 
helps deliver oxygen to the tissues where it is most needed. Physiologically, the main effect of these variables is 
to assist oxygen unloading, with more oxygen released to the most metabolical-ly active tissues. The reverse is 
true for the opposite situations.
58
Increasing the inspired oxygen will increase oxygen saturations, 
which increases the oxygen content of the blood.
Above a saturation of 98% there is little benefit from further 
increases in oxygenation.KEY POINT1
2
3Increasing the fraction of oxygen 
(FiO2) in the inspired air with a face 
mask increases the amount of oxygen 
in the gas-exchanging spaces in the lung – the alveoli
The extra oxygen in the alveoli 
encourages more oxygen to diffuse across into the blood in the lungs
The extra oxygen is taken up by 
haemoglobin in red blood cells, which increases the oxygen content of the blood reaching the tissuesHow increasing the amount of inspired oxygen can increase the oxygen delivered to the tissues
What are the risks of oxygen therapy?
Increasing the amount of inspired oxygen in a patient with low saturations, for example, <94% (check with 
your local policy on oxygen administration) is likely to increase the oxygen content of the blood, which will 
increase the delivery of oxygen to tissues.
This is important as there is a critical imbalance between oxygen supply and demand in sepsis. As suggested 
above, it is of paramount importance to correct hypoxaemia.
59
Oxygen should be titrated to achieve saturations of 94-98% in most patients unless they are immediately 
recognised to be critically ill.  In patients with known COPD, seek senior advice and have a low threshold for 
repeating arterial blood gas sampling. Once the SpO2 is at 98%, there is little benefit in further increases in
the amount of inspired oxygen.
There is a small risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure. 
Normally blood in the lungs flows to the alveoli (air-filled sacs where gas exchange occurs) that are best 
ventilated. The way the body works this out is by the amount of oxygen in the alveoli. The lung responds to a 
low amount of oxygen in an alveolus by narrowing the capillaries supplying it with blood, ensuring that less 
blood flows to poorly oxygenated areas of the lung. This is known as ‘hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction’. 
This means that the best performing parts of the lung receive most of the blood. Thus, CO 2 is easily removed, 
as most of the blood will go to alveoli that are ventilating well and so will be effective at removing CO 2.
When too much oxygen is given, all the alveoli become better oxygenated, and so blood is spread more 
evenly through the lung rather than focused on the best performing, well ventilated areas. This means that 
CO 2 removal becomes less efficient. 
For most people, this  is not a problem, as we can increase our tidal volume and respiratory rate to remove 
this extra CO 2. In those with impaired lung function, however, carbon dioxide levels can begin to rise. This 
theory has largely replaced the theory of ‘hypoxic drive’ in explaining hypercapnia developing in patients 
with COPD who are given high flow oxygen.
In patients with limited ventilation ability, this effect can result in them retaining CO 2. These patients are at 
risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure, and patient groups at risk will include:
•Some patients with COPD (particularly those on home oxygen or with previous
hypercapnic respiratory failure)
•Patients with neuromuscular problems affecting their breathing
•Patients with chest wall/spinal deformities
•Very obese patients
•Patients with bronchiectasis, including secondary to cystic fibrosis.
Hypercapnic respiratory failure is dangerous as it can lead to respiratory acidosis. It must be remembered 
that hypercapnia leading to acidosis generally happens slowly, and that regular blood gas monitoring can 
identify this. Hypercapnia can be managed with controlled oxygen, NIV (non-invasive ventilation) and/or 
invasive ventilation. 
In contrast, multi-organ failure from hypoxia happens quickly and rapidly becomes a problem that requires 
HDU/ITU or even becomes irreversible. In other words, hypoxia will kill quicker than hypercapnia.
For patients  at risk of hypercapnic  failure, close liaison  with  a senior doctor is essential (Specialist Trainee 
level ST3 and above in the UK) and/or senior nurse or physiotherapist with specialist skills (e.g, a Respiratory 
Nurse Specialist, or NIV Physio). The aim will generally be to give the highest tolerated amount of inspired 
oxygen.
One pragmatic approach, supported by NICE though not grounded in a huge evidence base, is to target 
oxygen saturations of 88-92% in these groups. You can then re-check a blood gas (if the pulse oximeter is 
working well, a venous gas is acceptable) at 30 minutes. If their CO 2 remains normal then continue, whereas 
if it has risen consider the need for ventilation or reduce the target range of saturations, but 
never tolerate life-threatening hypoxia!
60
1. There are a small group of patients at risk of hypercapnic respiratory
failure with high flow inspired oxygen
2. Even in these patients, hypoxia will kill before hypercapnia
3. In general, lower oxygen saturation ranges should be targeted, withblood gases to check for CO
2 retention and acidosis
4. Senior medical and nursing input should be sought for these patients.KEY POINT
Specific guidance is available in the BTS Guidelines for sepsis:
1. If the patient is shocked or otherwise critically ill, the initial oxygen therapyis a reservoir mask at 15 l/min
2. Once the patient is stable, reduce the oxygen flow and aim for target
saturation range of 94–98%
3. If oximetry is unavailable, continue to use a reservoir mask until definitive
treatment is available
4. Patients with COPD and other risk factors for hypercapnia who develop
critical illness should have the same initial target saturations as other
critically ill patients pending the results of blood gas measurements, afterwhich these patients may need controlled oxygen therapy supported byregular blood gas assessment
5. Use controlled oxygen therapy or supported ventilation if there is severehypoxaemia and/or hypercapnia with respiratory acidosis
Patients should not receive dry, high flow oxygen for more than four to six hours due to the risks of retained secretions, dehydration and loss of heat. If a patient continues to require high inspired oxygen concentrations then this must be humidified.PRACTICAL TIP
So how should we oxygenate the patient?
61
IV ACCESS 
AND BLOODS STEP
03
This element of the Sepsis 6 expanded in 2019. We feel it important that patients with sepsis, in addition 
to the critical sampling of blood and other cultures, have a full set of bloods sampled within the Sepsis 6 in 
order to identify otherwise unidentified organ dysfunction, and in order to guide ongoing care. We will 
describe the sampling and importance of blood cultures in the section on microbiology.
The rationale behind each recommended test is explained in brief below.
Blood glucose
As discussed within the chapter on Pathophysiology, the stress response which the body mounts in sepsis 
causes gluconeogenesis (creation of glucose by the liver), glycogenolysis (breakdown of glycogen in muscles 
for conversion to more glucose) and insulin resistance. The net result is that, in some patients, glucose levels 
will rise. Elevated blood glucose provides an ideal breeding ground for bacteria in body tissues, and 
significantly increases the risk of secondary infection. Most Critical Care units will consider starting insulin for 
this reason in patients who have elevated blood glucose- above, for example, a threshold of 10 mmol/l. They 
tend not to attempt to ‘normalise’ glucose or to control it too tightly due to the dangers of causing 
hypoglycaemia.
Lactate
We’re going to major on lactate, as it’s a hugely useful tool in risk stratification and in guiding resuscitation!
Normally, the body metabolises glucose to produce adenosine triphosphate – the ‘energy currency’ of the 
body, known as ATP. The end product of this process (glycolysis) produces another substance called 
pyruvate. Glycolysis does not equire oxygen. The pyruvate is then metabolised with oxygen in the cells’ 
mitochondria to produce more ATP.
If there is a lack of oxygen, pyruvate is instead converted to lactate. This conversion of pyruvate to lactate 
produces other substances that allow further glycolysis to happen. It’s important to note that this ‘escape 
route’ allows an alternative energy molecule, in the form of lactate, to be produced in times of stress – 
lactate in normal physiological situations is helpful, not bad!
In sepsis and in other pathological conditions, however, lactate is a marker of anaerobic respiration. It 
becomes elevated when oxygen delivery is inadequate for oxygen demand, which is known as ischaemia.
62
Lactate is a marker of anaerobic respiration in disease states or trauma. 
This could represent local ischaemia, or relative systemic ischaemia.KEY POINTA raised arterial lactate is usually because of one of four types of problems:
1. Insufficient oxygen delivery due to circulatory failure (the ‘macrocirculation’)
2.
Insufficient oxygen delivery in the microcirculation (the capillary beds are not working properly)
3. Inability of the tissues to use oxygen (e.g. mitochondrial dysfunction)4. Excessive oxygen demand (e.g. tonic-clonic seizures, or excessive exercise).
Despite optimising oxygen delivery in the macrocirculation through fluid challenges and optimising oxygen 
content, the lactate may still remain elevated in sepsis, which is a sinister sign. This failure to improve is 
partly because in sepsis there may also be microcirculatory derangement – the capillary beds, which 
normally send blood to where it is needed, have lost their regulatory capacity.
Normally, the microcirculation is regulated by signalling between local cells. These signals help match local 
tissue oxygen demand with local blood supply. In sepsis, this regulation gets deranged.
The two main issues are:
1.The flow in some capillaries stops altogether, which leaves tissue perfused by those capillaries hypoxic.
This is typically caused by physical obstruction of the capillaries, either by red and white blood cells with
reduced deformability or by microthrombi (tiny blood clots) formed by the dysfunctional clotting system.
2.Increased blood shunting directly from the arterioles (small arteries) to the venules (small veins) without
passing through the capillaries, which may cause tissues dependent on those arterioles to become hypoxic.
A lactate which was high at presentation but which recovers to normal (<2 mmol/L) following the Sepsis 6 
and optimisation of oxygen delivery suggests the problem was largely in the macrocirculation, which has 
been fixed for now. This is important, because early correction of oxygen delivery in the macrocirculation 
may reduce or even stop the development of microcirculatory problems. This rapid improvement of lactate 
is associated with a good outcome.
A lactate that remains >4 mmol/l despite optimisation of oxygen delivery is very concerning. This implies 
that there is also microcirculatory derangement, and mandates urgent Critical Care involvement.
It is therefore essential that, if the initial lactate is >2 mmol/l, lactate measurement is repeated regularly.
Lactate is useful for three reasons. First, it identifies earlier those patients who 
have circulatory problems but whose blood pressure is preserved: this is known as ‘cryptic shock’. Second, it predicts outcome: a high lactate means there is greater likelihood of a need for Critical Care admission. Third, it helps guide therapy: if it begins to fall with fluid challenges, then the challenges are helping.
63
Full Blood Count
A full blood count, or FBC, provides useful information in three key areas :
1. White blood cells- also known as leukocytes- are comprised of five main types:
• neutrophils
• lymphocytes
• eosinophils
• monocytes
• basophils
The total (all five added together) and differential white blood cell counts can help confirm (or refute) 
whether bacterial pathogens are responsible. 
A high total white blood cell count is indicative of inflammation. It can rise with many non-infective 
conditions, including heart attacks and pulmonary emboli. It can also be chronically elevated in some 
haematological malignancies and chronic inflammatory conditions, so always needs interpreting in the 
context of the patient’s condition and medical history. As a rule of thumb, if there’s no history of relevant 
underlying chronic disease, conditions such as heart attack and PE tend to cause more modest elevations of 
white blood cell count than are often seen in sepsis.
In the differential white blood cell count, a relatively high neutrophil count supports that bacteria might be 
responsible.
With both total and differential white blood cell counts, a single measurement can be unhelpful. In the early 
phases of sepsis, the white cell count tends to rise. If the condition is particularly aggressive or the patient 
presents late in their disease course, however, it can begin to fall as the body’s ability to produce white blood 
cells cannot match the rate of their destruction as they attempt to fight the infection. 
2.Platelets
Platelets from part of the acute phase response in many inflammatory conditions, including in the systemic 
response to infection and in sepsis. As a result, early in the disease process, the platelet count tends to 
increase modestly or even markedly. This finding would tend to support a clinical view that the patient is 
undergoing an acute inflammatory process.
Of more prognostic significance is a low platelet count. As described in the chapter on Pathophysiology, 
sepsis causes activation of the coagulation cascade (if you recall, sepsis is essentially a helpful local process 
gone wrong) at the site of injury, making the blood hypercoagulable, which is helpful to reduce bleeding. 
When the process becomes dysregulated and systemic, it’s definitely unhelpful! 
As a result, microthrombi form throughout the vascular system. As the condition progresses, this can give 
rise to a situation where the body’s ability to produce platelets can’t keep pace with their consumption in the 
formation of clots – in this ‘consumptive coagulopathy’, platelet count falls.
A low platelet count is a bad sign in patients with sepsis. Indeed, a platelet count of <100 x 109/l in a
previously well patient with a new infection defines sepsis in the Sepsis-3 definition.
64
3. Haemoglobin
1.The degree of anaemia
An [Hb] <7g/dL is a commonly used threshold for transfusion. However, the absolute value of the [Hb] alone is not the best 
marker for guiding transfusion, and the other factors below are at least as significant.
2.The ‘acuteness’ of the anaemia
The more acute the anaemia (the more quickly it has arisen), the worse it will be tolerated.
3.Co-existing problems with oxygen delivery
In a patient with other problems with oxygen delivery (e.g. hypoxia or reduced cardiac output), the anaemia will decompensate 
them further than an equivalent patient without hypoxia or reduced cardiac output. For this reason, many centres have higher 
transfusion targets in patients with cardiac or respiratory disease.
4.Symptoms
A patient who is tachycardic, acidotic, severely short of breath and showing signs of acute heart failure with an [Hb] of 8.1 g/dL is 
probably more needing of a transfusion than a very comfortable, awake patient with an [Hb] of 6.9 g/dL.As we’ve seen before:
Oxygen content (measured in ml) = [1.34 x [Hb] x % SpO2] + 0.003 x PaO2
Again as above, an oxygen saturation of 100% does not necessarily mean the patient has optimal oxygen 
content in the blood. A reduced [Hb] will decrease the oxygen content of the blood without decreasing the 
saturation; in other words, a patient who is profoundly anaemic (e.g, haemoglobin of 5.5g/dL) can have a 
saturation of 100% but will have a very low blood oxygen content.
In general, the factors that will determine the need for red cell transfusion are:
Minor transfusion problems
• Fever, chills, urticaria
Major transfusion problems
• Acute Haemolysis
• Delayed Haemolysis
• Anaphylaxis
• Transmission of Human immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Human T-cell lympho -
trophic virus I and II, Hepatitis B and C, Cytomegalovirus
• Bacterial contamination
• Graft-versus-host disease
• Acute lung injury
• Volume overload
• Hypothermia
• Immunomodulation/immunosuppressionRisks of transfusion of blood products
65
Additional blood tests
U&Es
Urea and electrolytes has become almost a ‘routine’ test for patients presenting to hospital. The primary 
function in the early assessment of sepsis of U&Es is the assessment of renal function.
As with any organ, kidney function can become impaired in sepsis. Renal failure is not always associated with 
low urine output – measurement of U&Es will help to identify patients with latent kidney dysfunction.
Renal failure as a consequence of sepsis is associated with a less favourable prognosis- it’s essential that 
patients identified as having acute kidney injury (AKI), whether through recognition of a low urine output or 
through U&Es, are monitored closely and escalated early. A creatinine of >171 µmol/l or higher in a previously 
well patient with a new infection defines sepsis in the Sepsis-3 definition
AKI can also precipitate high serum potassium levels, or hyperkalaemia. Hyperkalaemia can be immediately 
life-threatening in the precipitation of dysrhythmias. 
Similarly, if large fluid shifts have occurred as a result of sepsis, for example diarrhoea and vomiting, 
hypokalaemia can result which can be equally life-threatening. 
C-reactive protein
C-reactive protein, or CRP, is one of the acute phase proteins. It is elevated in conditions causing chronic and
acute inflammation, typically being more elevated in acute inflammatory states. Measurement of CRP can
thus aid in the confirmation of a likely inflammatory state (rather than confirm infection). Trends over time
can help to determine whether treatment is effective or not.
Other tests which can be measured to assess inflammatory response include (but are not limited to) 
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR), procalcitonin, adrenomedullin and pancreatic stone protein. The latter 
two show some evidence of greater selectivity for infective causes, though are not routinely used.
Clotting
As described above, consumptive coagulopathy can result in a situation where the body’s ability to produce 
not only platelets but also new clotting factors cannot keep pace with their consumption as more and more 
microthrombi form. This may initially cause only mild elevation of the International Normalised Ratio (INR), a 
test which tests the function of the extrinsic clotting system and measures the efficacy of clotting factors I 
(fibrinogen), II (prothrombin), V (proaccelerin) and X (Stuart-Prower Factor).
If the host response is severe enough, Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC) may result, which is 
typically associated with progression to multi-organ failure. DIC is characterised by severe depletion of clotting 
factors manifest as a high INR, together with bleeding, typically from mucous membranes, the bowel and 
venepuncture sites. Therapy for DIC is supportive through the control of bleeding, correction of the underlying 
cause and infusion of blood products. The prognosis if DIC develops is less favourable.
A 
further mechanism which may affect clotting tests in sepsis is hepatic failure, which can occur either as a 
consequence of inflammation or due to liver ischaemia in septic shock. Again, this carries a less favourable 
prognosis.
66
Other Samples
If you suspect a source of sepsis, send other body fluids too as appropriate and guided by a full history and 
examination; for  example sputum, urine, CSF, or any overt pus.  The more  samples the lab receives, the 
greater the chance of identifying the bug. This can help your patient in one of two ways: if the bug is 
resistant to the antibiotics you have chosen, you can change to the right therapy more quickly, and if it is a 
sensitive organism you can change to a less toxic, narrower spectrum agent and reduce the risk of causing a 
secondary infection. The type of bug grown can also point to the source of infection where this is not 
already known or suspected. Most centres are able to use rapid molecular techniques for identifying 
particular bugs, for example, looking for antigens in the urine to Legionella species and Streptococcus 
pneumoniae . We expect that this type of technology will become increasingly important and increasingly 
available at the point of care.
If the source is unclear, consider imaging such as a chest X-ray, or imaging of the abdomen or urinary tract. 
If a source of infection amenable to drainage is present, such as a pelvic abscess, intervention is urgent and 
should involve discussion with senior clinicians. Drainage by an interventional radiologist or surgeon should 
be organised as quickly as possible, and preferably within 6 hours.
GIVE IV ANTIBIOTICS 
AND CONSIDER 
SOURCE CONTROL STEP
04
For some patients, each hour’s delay in giving antibiotics increases 
mortality. For others, significant delays are likely to adversely impact on outcome.KEY POINT
A 2006 study by Anand Kumar showed an increase in mortality of 7.6% for every hour’s delay in 
administration of appropriate antibiotic therapy. More recent studies have contested this finding, at least in 
magnitude, but there is good evidence that early appropriate antibiotics are better than late or 
inappropriate ones!
Antibiotic choice should be guided by the suspected focus of infection. This depends on your clinical, 
microbiological and radiological evidence for infection. The choice of antibiotic should be in line with your 
local hospital guidelines. If in doubt, discuss with the microbiology or infectious diseases teams.
67
Your Trust will have a local antibiotic policy, depending on the source of 
the infection. The commonest two sources are chest and abdominal 
infections, so a broad spectrum β-lactam, with or without an 
aminoglycoside and with consideration to anaerobic cover, are good 
starting points.If you are confident about the source of the infection, then the antibiotic choice should be tailored to cover 
the likely pathogens according to local antibiotic prescribing guidelines. If you're less confident about the 
source of the infection, then a broad spectrum agent covering gram negatives and gram positives, with 
consideration to anaerobic and anti-pseudomonal cover can be started in consultation with your local 
guidelines and infection specialists. This should certainly not be a default position - considering the likely 
source of infection is a critical step in the responsible use of antimicrobials.
The choice and need for antibiotics should be reviewed daily, and again as soon as culture & sensitivity 
results are known in order to reduce antibiotic resistance and toxicity. If appropriate, based upon culture 
results, antimicrobial therapy should be de-escalated as soon as possible (check for any positive results 
after 24, 48 & 72 hours) in order to reduce opportunities for the development of antimicrobial resistance 
and toxicity.
PRACTICAL TIP
Trust your local experts
Responsible antibiotic stewardship involves reviewing the decision to keep the patient on IV antibiotics at 
24, 48 and 72 hours together with a plan to convert to oral therapy once the patient improves, and a fixed 
course of therapy. Discussion with microbiology or infectious diseases teams can be very helpful here.
It’s important to remember that not all sepsis is caused by bacteria. Certain risk factors should prompt 
consideration of anti-fungal treatment, including patients with solid organ transplants, those who have 
received multiple or prolonged courses of antibiotics, or those with complicated bowel perforation. A failure 
to respond to therapy should alert the clinician to the possibility of an alternative diagnosis, the need to 
escalate spectrum of antibiotic cover, or to consider fungal or atypical bacterial causes.
Source Control
If a source of infection is identified which is amenable to drainage or removal (collectively known as 
'source control'), then this should be planned once initial resuscitation has been completed to be 
undertaken as soon as it is safe and practicable to do so. Some sources amenable to source control can 
be dealt with in a ward environment, such as removal of an infected vascular access device (VAD). Others 
need more specialist intervention, which may require careful coordination and planning.
A patient with an sepsis caused by an abscess may require timely surgical intervention, which will require 
liaison with surgeons, anaesthetists and operating theatre teams. A patient with sepsis caused by a UTI 
where there is obstruction to the flow of urine with hydronephrosis (an acutely distended kidney) may 
well require a nephrostomy, which might be performed by an interventional radiologist.
Though the Royal College of Surgeons recommends that source control always be completed within 6 
hours, this will need to be balanced against risks to the pat ient  if they're unstable and resuscitation is 
ongoing. Such planning is complex and requires prioritisation of discussion between senior members of 
staff.
68
CONSIDER IV
FLUIDSSTEP05
STRIDE LENGTH
(STROKE VOLUME)NUMBER OF STEPS
(HEART RATE)
COMBINED = CARDIAC OUTPUTFluids  are key to ensuring  that the tissues  get the oxygen and nutrients they need: helping to restore the 
imbalance between oxygen supply and demand.
To start with, consider again how oxygen delivery to the tissues is determined:
O2 delivery = O2 content of blood x cardiac output
... or, the amount of oxygen delivered to a tissue or organ depends on how much oxygen is in the blood, and 
how much blood is flowing to the tissue or organ.
Cardiac Output
The cardiac output is one of the determinants of oxygen delivery to tissues and organs. There are two 
factors governing cardiac output:
Cardiac output = stroke volume x heart rate
Diagram above: 
Your walking pace is given by the length of your stride (the stroke volume, which is the amount of blood 
the heart pumps out with each beat) multiplied by the number of strides per minute (heart rate). In a 
similar way, cardiac output is given by the stroke volume multiplied by the heart rate.
The body will naturally increase the heart rate in an attempt to overcome a low blood pressure or 
vasodilatation. This effect is frequently seen early in sepsis.
69
The stroke volume is dependent on three variables:
1.Preload
‘Preload’ describes how ‘full’ the heart is before it contracts to eject blood – it’s determined by the 
circulating volume. A hypovolaemic patient will have a low preload and therefore a low stroke volume .
Greater circulating volume › Increased venous return › Increased stroke volume
The reason the increased venous return leads to increased force of contraction is because of the Frank-
Starling mechanism. This states that the more blood that stretches the heart whilst it is filling, the more 
forcefully it contracts.
2.Afterload
This is the pressure that the ventricle must overcome to eject blood, caused by the tone (state of 
contraction) of the blood vessels, and is otherwise known as the ‘systemic vascular resistance’.
A higher afterload tends to lead to a reduced stroke volume (and therefore cardiac output) because the 
heart has to work harder to overcome the resistance. In sepsis, the afterload is usually low, and the heart 
rate and contractility (see below) will need to increase to maintain blood pressure. This is why in early 
stages of sepsis the circulation is described as hyperdynamic: cardiac output initially rises.In a healthy heart, preload is often the major determinant of stroke volume.
In patients with heart failure, afterload is often a major determinant of 
stroke volume. In sepsis, the afterload is often low: so for patients with 
cardiac failure who develop sepsis, contractility becomes the main 
determinant of stroke volume, which frequently falls.
70
1.The forces encouraging fluid to stay in the vessels must be great er than the forces encouraging
fluid to leave the vessels
2.The blood vessels must not be leaky.
The first point is based on Starling’s law of the capillaries. This states that the pressure differences 
between the blood vessels and tissue compartment are the driving force of fluid movement between 
these compartments. There are two types of pressure – ‘hydrostatic’ and ‘oncotic’, which are briefly 
outlined below.Fluid in the wrong placeLack of total body fluid
Absolute hypovolaemia, where there is less circulating volume, compounds relative hypovolaemia. It 
occurs in sepsis for two reasons:
A.a lack of total body fluid, or
B.body fluid in the wrong place
This can be from decreased intake of fluid, or increased fluid losses. Some causes are given in the table:
Decreased fluid intake Increased losses
Lack of appetite Sweating
Lethargy
Confusion
Decreased consciousnessIncreased ventilation
Diarrhoea
Vomiting
Bleeding (DIC)
Fluid in the wrong place
When fluid is in the wrong place, this usually means fluid has moved from the plasma into the tissues, so 
it’s no longer in the circulation. 
For fluid  to remain in  the blood  vessels two things are needed:
71
The aims of fluid therapy are: 
1. To correct absolute and relative hypovolaemia
2. To bring the patient’s pulse, blood pressure, mental state, lactate and
urine output within target
3. To do this judiciously, and to avoid pushing the patient into overload.KEY POINT
Fluid choice
Crystalloids are the preferred first line fluid for resuscitation.
Appropriate initial fluid choices in most patients are Hartmann’s solution, or a balanced solution such as 
the proprietary brand Plasmalyte®.Hydrostatic pressure is essentially blood pressure. If the blood pressure is 120/60 in a leaky blood vessel, 
and the pressure in the tissues around it is 20mmHg, fluid will tend to leak out of the vessel into the tissues. 
Oncotic pressure, on the other hand, is a pressure caused by the amount of proteins in the space. 
Fluid  tends to stay in  the space  containing  proteins, particularly  albumin. Thus, if the patient has a low level 
of albumin (as can happen in sepsis), more fluid will tend to leak out of the vessels into the tissues.
The second determinant (leaky blood vessels) is particularly relevant in sepsis. In sepsis, the infectious 
organism triggers the release of multiple inflammatory messengers or ‘cytokines’. The target for these 
inflammatory messengers includes the inner lining of the blood vessels (endothelium, particularly in 
capillaries), where they cause them to leak. As described in a previous chapter, capillary leak is a healthy 
response  when localised  to a site of injury, but  harmful  when it is  generalised. Capillary  leak will  increase  
whenever  there  is alteration, damage, or death of the endothelial cell.
72
30% of fluid remains in 
intravascular space
Not associated with 
hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis
30% of fluid remains in 
intravascular space
Does not contain 
potassium, so may be safer in established renal failure without urine outputContains potassium, so make sure the patient is not potassium overloaded
Caution in liver disease - 
Hartmann’s contains small amounts of lactate which can accumulate
Risk of hyperchloraemic 
acidosis if high volumes given
Only 10% of fluid remains in 
the intravascular space: poor at replenishing circulating volume
Can cause hyponatremia
Starch solutions carry a risk 
of acute kidney injury com -
pared to crystalloids and are NOT RECOMMENDED in patients with sepsis
Very expensive
Risks of blood transfusion 
Crossmatched blood not 
immediately available
Contains a lot more 
potassium than Hartmann’s!None (in the acutely hypovolemic patient)
As for 0.9% sodium 
chloride
Corrects anaemia and stays 
in vasculatureStays predominantly in the 
vasculature. Consider when 
large volumes of resusci-
tation fluid needed. SAFE 
study suggestive of benefit in 
sepsis , currently being 
evaluated in the ABC Sepsis 
TrialFLUID
Hartmann’s
5% dextrose
Albumin
Packed red cells0.9% Sodium 
chloride
Colloids (except 
albumin)ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES
73
In the early stages of sepsis (‘warm sepsis’), a previously healthy patient typically ‘looks’ well perfused. 
Vasodilatation means that their peripheries are pink and warm, and their cardiac output is preserved or 
higher than normal as they increase their heart rate and contractility. Don’t be fooled, though. Their blood 
pressure might be already lower than ideal, and these patients will still need guided fluid resuscitation to 
correct their relative hypovolaemia. Later in sepsis, the relative hypovolaemia becomes compounded by 
absolute hypovolaemia. Patients begin to become puffy with oedema as capillaries begin to leak fluid into 
the tissues, and ultimately their compensatory mechanisms can't keep pace with the losses. Their body tries 
to compensate by shutting down peripheral perfusion – the skin at the peripheries becomes cool and 
clammy and can take on a ‘mottled’ appearance. This is known as ‘cold sepsis’, and means the patient needs 
urgent, aggressive resuscitation. The situation can be made even worse by circulating factors reducing 
contractility of the heart in sepsis.
Rationalising how the fluids are given
Imagine a tank full of fluid (preload) attached to a pump (contractility), with a hosepipe leading out of the 
pump. Your thumb is over the end of the hosepipe to restrict flow, to boost pressure (resistance). 
If a patient is in shock, this could be because of a lack of fluid (hypovolemic shock). The tank is empty, so 
even if the pump is working well it can’t work efficiently as it can’t draw enough fluid. 
Cardiogenic shock means a lack of pumping power. In distributive shock, which includes septic shock, 
vasodilation means that although blood flow might be high (the tank is full and the pump is working well), 
pressure is low and the cells distant from the capillaries won’t receive any oxygen. You’ve taken your thumb 
off the end of the pipe! The things we measure at the bedside can give us clues as to where the problem lies. 
The ‘markers of end organ perfusion’ tell us if the patient is in shock.
Their conscious level may become affected as their brain perfusion reduces. A fall in perfusion to the kidneys 
can cause a low urine output. Poor lung perfusion can result in hypoxaemia which appears unrelated to lung 
pathology. Perfusion to the peripheries can reduce later in sepsis (described above) and will result in a 
delayed capillary refill. Poor global perfusion can be assessed by measuring blood lactate, since anaerobic 
metabolism causes the production of lactic acid.
Normal blood volume, 
normal cardiac function 
and normal peripheral 
pressure means good end 
organ perfusionA hypovolemic state leads 
to poor end organ 
perfusion, even if the 
cardiac function is normalPoor cardiac function 
leads to poor end organ 
perfusion, despite an 
adequate blood volume
74
Again, blood pressure is an important component of perfusion, but flow is also a determinant of the amount 
of oxygen and nutrients the tissues are receiving. Thus, a normal or even high blood pressure can still be 
compatible with shock – if a patient has a blood pressure of 130/55, but with a low cardiac output  of two 
litres per minute (normal is around 5 lpm), their tissues will still be starved of oxygen. 
The bottom line is that each patient is different, and some (often older) patients will be in shock at blood 
pressures that others would tolerate with no problem. Whilst a very low blood pressure is likely to cause 
inadequate perfusion in all patients, we must be careful not to be reassured by a BP of 109/61 when the 
capillary refill (CR) is 4 seconds, for example. 
Ideally, we would be able to see the blood pressure, pulse, urine output, lactate production and capillary 
perfusion change in real time as we give the fluid to help judge the amount and rate required. 
In practice, we can't measure these parameters continuously. However, we can measure mental state, 
pulse, blood pressure and urine output at specific times, and CR is a useful bedside clinical sign.
This is where the idea of a fluid challenge comes from. On the ward, the goal is to improve the 
haemodynamic markers that we can measure by giving repeated fluid challenges until there is no further 
improvement or until there are signs of fluid overload. 
In sepsis, early aggressive fluid resuscitation to correct hypovolaemia makes sense and should improve the 
outcome, though evidence is currently scant. NICE recommends that the initial total volume in patients with 
evidence of poor perfusion should be at least 500ml, delivered as quickly as possible and certainly within 15 
minutes. International guidance, most recently released by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign in October 2021, 
extends this to a total volume of 30 ml per kg body weight though increasingly guidance is erring on the side 
of caution and NICE in NG51 suggest an initial bolus of up to 20 ml per kg. This is our current 
recommendation. This can be delivered in divided fluid challenges of 500ml of crystalloid, provided that 
there is a favourable response after each challenge. Fluid challenges should always be commenced within 
the first hour (with the first 500ml delivered within 15 minutes) in any patient with Red Flag or High Risk 
criteria for Sepsis. If the lactate is >4 mmol/l and the patient is hypotensive, Critical Care should also be 
called. Fluid resuscitation can still be considered in patients with a normal lactate and blood pressure >90 
mmHg according to clinical assessment.
Scenario
A 65-year-old lady (weight 70 kg)  has had a fever for the past day and has experienced burning on passing 
urine for the past two days. She has been screened for sepsis as her NEWS2 is 6. A urine dipstick is positive 
for nitrites and leucocytes. Her observations on admission are: 
•Pulse 102
•BP 99/78
•RR 22
•Sats 100% on air
•Temp 38.5
Clinically, she has a capillary refill of five seconds and her lips seem dry. Her chest is clear, and there is no 
peripheral oedema.
75
The catheter has drained 30ml of dark urine. You are awaiting the blood results. Your team has already 
performed five of the Sepsis 6, and has asked you to manage the fluids. 
In this scenario, you should prescribe a fluid challenge of 500 ml Hartmann’s or Plasmalyte (or equivalent) 
stat, and be prepared to repeat should her parameters not return to normal.
Remember, for this 70kg patient we would be aiming to give up to 1400ml in the initial resuscitation period 
depending on response. 20 minutes later and after your fluid challenge, her observations are:
•Pulse 90
•BP 113/82
•RR 20
•Sats 100% on air
•Temp 38.6
The catheter has drained a further 20 ml in this time. What would you do now?
There are three key questions to ask yourself after each fluid challenge:
1.Is the patient showing any signs of fluid overload?
If overloaded, stop giving fluids and consider the need for diuresis to offload fluids. Critical Care support is
likely to be needed at this point.
2.Have the blood pressure, conscious level, lactate and urine output responded favourably?
If these parameters have not responded favourably, look for causes for these markers other than
hypovolemia. It is entirely possible that the patient is severely hypovolemic and needs a further fluid
challenge. If they have responded favorably, proceed to question three:
3.Where are the blood pressure, lactate, conscious level & urine output in relation to my  targets?
If they have responded and the markers are acceptable in relation to your targets, then stop fluid
resuscitation for now, although you must regularly reassess the patient.
NICE NG51 recommends that the following targets be reached:
1.Systolic BP >90 mmHg
Remember this is not absolute – different patients will require different levels of blood pressure. For 
example, an 80-year-old who is normally hypertensive is likely to be quite unwell if they present with a 
blood pressure of 110/60 in the context of tachycardia and other signs of reduced perfusion, whereas a 
healthy 20-year-old may well be have a systolic blood pressure of 89mmHg when they’re normally asleep. 
These thresholds are guides, and common sense should always prevail in the context of the patient!
Systolic blood pressurePulse pressure
Diastolic blood pressureMean arterial pressure is the 
diastolic pressure plus one third of the pulse pressure
Diastolic blood pressure
76
2. Normal conscious level
3. Respiratory rate <25 breaths/minute4. Lactate <2 mmol/l
When you see your patient with sepsis, you can deliver three of the Sepsis 6 
as soon as you have IV access:
1.Send bloods, including cultures
2.Give a stat IV dose of antibiotics (remember to also consider source control)
3.Give your first fluids, if indicated, fast.
Your usual challenge if indicated will be an initial 500 ml within five minutes, 
followed by further challenges up to a total of 20ml/kg of Hartmann’s or Plasmalyte 
(or equivalent) (or ‘normal’ Saline 0.9% if these are unavailable) In this case, there was favourable change in pulse, blood pressure and urine output. The urine output (a 
further 20ml in just 20 minutes) and blood pressure are now acceptable with just the first fluid challenge. 
By no means is this always the case – always reassess and be prepared to repeat!  Some  
patients  will need the full  20ml/kg.
If these targets are still not reached, or if the initial lactate was >4 mmol/l, call Critical Care urgently.
How do we decide about further fluid challenges?
Our thresholds for continuing (or not) with fluid resuscitation will depend in part on the patient:
A fit, young person has a large therapeutic window for fluids, and so a 
generous approach to fluid is usually safe.
A patient with a heart failure has a much narrower therapeutic window for 
fluids, and so a more cautious approach to fluid therapy is needed.
PRACTICAL TIP
First fluids fast, second set slower
77
given in divided boluses as quickly as possible but always within the first hour, although 
lower volumes (but not lower rates) should be used in those at risk of overload. 
Monitor the response to each fluid challenge, and repeat if the systolic blood pressure 
remains <90 mmHg, the patient’s mental state has not returned to normal, or their lactate 
is still >2 mmol/l. Capillary refill time, pulse rate and urine output are good additional signs 
of adequate restoration of circulating volume.
Stop if there are signs of overload. If you have reached 20ml/kg in total within an hour and 
the patient remains poorly perfused, or their blood pressure, mental state or lactate have 
not returned to acceptable levels, then refer immediately to Critical Care and tell your 
senior.
Once the patient has a systolic blood pressure >90 mmHg, their mental state has returned 
to normal, and their lactate is <2 mmol/l, ensure the patient has regular observations (at 
least every 30 minutes initially) and that further fluids will be prescribed if needed. It is a 
good idea to write up maintenance fluids e.g. eight hourly bags of Hartmann’s if the 
patient will not have sufficient oral  intake.
These are only guides, and some patients will still need senior review even 
if you have attained these goals. If the patient ‘doesn’t look right’, trust your instinct!
Therefore, in a patient who is known to have congestive cardiac failure you should deliver smaller 
challenges more slowly, and call for senior help or Critical Care. If your initial fluid challenges, to a volume of 
20ml per kg body weight, do not restore blood pressure AND if the lactate remains >4 mmol/l, this is SEPTIC 
SHOCK. Septic shock is a critical situation and demands immediate referral to Critical Care.
MONITOR STEP
06
Sepsis is a dynamic condition. Just as patients treated with the Sepsis 6 can improve 
rapidly, so they can subsequently deteriorate. This can occur for a number of reasons, such as a transient response to fluid resuscitation or development of a secondary infection. For these reasons, and once a patient has stabilised, it’s imperative that a plan for ongoing monitoring be documented, communicated and implemented. The frequency of review will be guided by the clinical setting and by local protocol- in the acute sector, this may demand repeating observations as regularly as every 15 minutes. In General Practice and where clinical judgement has deemed it safe for care to be delivered in the community, this may be a scheduled review the following day.
78
Urine output
In the early stages, urine output is key.
Most people will present for the first time with sepsis in primary care, in the Emergency Department or 
Medical/Surgical Admissions Unit or as a deteriorating patient on the ward, not in Intensive Care. This 
means that there will be little or no access to cardiac output monitoring – we can’t assess the flow.
As we’ve said, the perfusion of tissues is dependent upon blood pressure (the force needed to overcome 
resistance – if BP is too low, the cells at the peripheries will not receive blood flow) and blood flow, which is 
determined by cardiac output.
A patient with a blood pressure of 80/40, and a cardiac output of eight litres per 
minute, is likely in better shape than a patient with a blood pressure of 150/100 
and a cardiac output of 0.5 litres per minute.
In healthcare, we have become over-reliant on blood pressure, probably because it’s easier to measure. 
For patients with sepsis, it is critical to have another window on the circulation – and urine output 
provides this.
Urine output (at least in health) is relatively independent of blood pressure due to a process known as 
autoregulation, although the effect of this diminishes in critical illness.
As described earlier in this manual and as this diagram shows, blood flow through the kidneys remains 
fairly constant over a range of blood pressures (green curve ):
However, the kidneys cannot autoregulate well for changes in blood flow. The relationship here is quite 
linear – as blood flow to the kidneys falls, so does renal blood flow and therefore urine output (gold line).
The urine output is an excellent window on the circulation. As blood flow (cardiac output) falls, so does 
urine output. This is essential in guiding further fluid challenges, and may identify a problem with the 
circulation before the blood pressure begins to fall.
The target urine output is a minimum of 0.5 ml/kg/hr. If this cannot be achieved, firstly check that the 
catheter is not blocked. Then evaluate whether or not the patient remains hypovolaemic - if not, then 
ensure you get senior help as an acute kidney injury is an adverse event!
79
Can’t we just compare the inputs and the outputs to decide about fluid balance?
Partly, but we need to be mindful that the fluid balance chart does not take into account insensible losses 
and gains. 
Insensible losses
Skin: about 400-500 ml/day. Increased in pyrexia and sweating.
Respiratory: about 400-500 ml/day. Increased with hyperventilation, though this effect is decreased if 
humidified inspired air/oxygen are administered in the context of respiratory distress.
Insensible gain
Metabolism: about 400 ml/day.
It may seem that the input should be about 400ml greater than the output in a ‘typical’ fluid balance chart. 
However, the insensible losses are impossible to measure, and what is going on in each patient is so variable 
that it is meaningless to target a particular number in fluid balance to cover this theoretical difference based 
on the average relatively well patient. Instead, we should be guided by:
1. Clinical scenario
2. Clinical assessment of fluid status
3. Observations including NEWS2
4. Markers of end organ perfusion and hydration (mucous membranes, capillary refill, mental status, 
urine output, lactate)
5. U&Es
The numbers given by daily requirements are just guides; what you actually prescribe is determined by all of 
these factors.
PRACTICAL TIP
So easily done…
Don’t forget to start a fluid balance chart once you have put the catheter in!
Serial lactates
As stated above, the way in which serum lactate levels respond to fluid challenges is hugely useful in 
assessing response to therapy and predicting outcome. If the initial lactate was >2 mmol/l, the lactate should 
be measured at least every hour until it has normalised.
Once fluid resuscitation and oxygen therapy have helped return the lactate to below 2 mmol/l, then repeat 
measurements can be stopped, but must be restarted if the patient’s clinical condition deteriorates.
If the delivery of divided fluid challenges to a total of 20 ml/kg (and correction of hypoxia if needed) fails to 
reduce the lactate below 4 mmol/l, this is an indication to call Critical Care urgently.
80
Patients deteriorate as a result of a huge number of underlying conditions, and at any point in the 
healthcare system. Due to the heterogeneity of patients and their illnesses, it’s essential we have a standard 
language with which to communicate the acuity of illness and any deterioration.
As described in the Defining Sepsis chapter, NEWS2 was introduced by the Royal College of Physicians 
(RCP) in 2017. NEWS2 is an iteration of the original NEWS, which has become the most evidence-based 
track-and-trigger scoring system globally. Neither RCP nor NHS England would claim that NEWS2 is perfect. 
It reflects the best of our understanding around the physiology of deterioration right now, but is likely to 
iterate over time as evidence comes to light. What’s critical is that it permits a common language- a health 
professional in a residential care facility can now communicate to a receiving health professional in an acute 
hospital in a succinct manner using a language both understand. 
It’s important to note that, because we accept NEWS2 to be imperfect, it can be trumped by the clinical 
judgement of a competent decision maker. It’s illogical to believe that a patient with a heart rate of 130 is 
gravely ill, whereas another with a heart rate of 128 is fine. Any tool using physiological thresholds should be 
interpreted in the context of clinical assessment- if an experienced clinician believes a patient to be sick, 
they probably are even if their NEWS2 happens to only be 3.
Now that we have a standardised monitoring system, it’s important that we respond to it appropriately 
when it triggers, and escalate care.
All acute Trusts, and increasingly organisations in the community and prehospital settings, have escalation 
policies for NEWS2. What is increasingly recognised is that the first escalation is, in general, better adhered 
to than the second! The vignette below gives an example of what may well happen in practice:NEWS2
A 64 year old patient had presented the previous day with sepsis secondary to a suspected 
urinary tract infection. 
Her initial NEWS2 score was 9, including a tachycardia of 138, a respiratory rate of 28, and a 
blood pressure of 88/54. 
Following fluid resuscitation and delivery of the Sepsis 6, the patient stabilised. Her NEWS2 
aggregate score returned to 3 and it was deemed appropriate to send her to the ward with imaging of her renal tract requested.
She had something of a rocky night. Despite adequate maintenance fluids and timely delivery 
of further antibiotics, she continued to spike temperatures, and had occasional runs of tachycardia up to 130 bpm.
At 22:00, she started to drop her blood pressure again and the FY1 was called by the nurse, as 
her NEWS2 increased again to 6.
The doctor recognised hypotension, but had a niggling concern around the risk of fluid overload. She prescribed 1000ml of Normal Saline over the next 4 hours, and assured the nurse that she would review later.
81
Over the following hours, the patient’s NEWS2 score failed to improve, remaining between 5 
and 6. The nurse, concerned that the patient was now slightly confused and urine output was tailing off, called the junior doctor again. The junior doctor reviewed after a further hour, at which point the patient’s NEWS2 was 6 and her urine output for the previous hour had been just 10ml. The requested imaging had not yet been completed. She responded by prescribing a 250ml fluid challenge. Although the escalation policy now demanded that she call her senior, she elected not to do so as it was now past midnight.
The patient continued to deteriorate, and the following morning Critical Care were called as 
her NEWS2 was now 8. She was transferred to Level 2 care (‘HDU’) for enhanced monitoring, and was started on a vasopressor infusion. She narrowly avoided the need for renal replacement therapy. An ultrasound of her renal tract revealed a left sided dilatation of her ureter and kidney with inflammation of the kidney. A nephrostomy was performed percutaneously and she began to improve over the following few days. 
This scenario, though hopefully less likely to happen today as we continue to improve systems and break 
down the historical hierarchy in healthcare, illustrates some common themes identified in reviews of 
untoward events in the deteriorating patient:
•Whilst NEWS2 scores breaching threshold for the first time are generally escalated well, niggling 
scores fluctuating around a threshold are addressed more poorly
•Similarly, the first tier of escalation is generally well performed, but the second (and third) less so
•Health professionals continue to exhibit tendencies toward caution in some circumstances: “we’ve 
become so afraid of doing harm, that sometimes we neglect to do good”
•The structure of acute healthcare means that acute illness at presentation tends to be better man 
aged than subsequent deterioration
As a result of the review in this case, the Trust decided to modify its escalation policy and lower the 
threshold for calling Critical Care Outreach, which demanded investment in skilled staff. It also reminded 
staff that investigations to identify the source of infection in patients with presumed sepsis, along with 
source control, require completing within 12 hours following presentation and preferably within 6 hours.
The junior doctor reflected that she could be more assertive when presented with a deteriorating patient, 
and that if a patient was critically unwell it really didn’t matter what time it was when she asked for help!
The nurse reflected that, in future, if he was dissatisfied with the actions of a junior doctor or specialist 
nurse colleague and remained very worried about the patient, he would immediately escalate to his senior.
There is no standard escalation policy for NEWS2, but the table below illustrates themes around which 
existing policies should be evaluated and refreshed:
82
Summary
SEPSIS01 
0402050306
SENIOR 
HELP 
GIVE IV
ANTIBIOTICS
AND CONSIDER
SOURCE CONTROL GIVE O2 IF
REQUIRED
CONSIDER 
IV FLUIDSIV ACCESS AND BLOODS
MONITOR 
Spot it. Treat it. Beat it.
83
86
ONGOING
CARE
84
1) Measure lactate level.*
2) Obtain blood cultures before administering antibiotics.
3) Administer broad-spectrum antibiotics.
4) Begin rapid administration of 30mL/kg crystalloid for
hypotension or lactate ≥4 mmol/L.
5) Apply vasopressors if hypotensive during or after fluid
resuscitation to maintain a mean arterial pressure ≥ 65 mm Hg.
*Remeasure lactate if initial lactate elevated (> 2 mmol/L)INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter, we will discuss the ongoing care for the patient with sepsis from the ward to Critical Care, in 
the context of the new recommendations within the updated Surviving Sepsis Campaign in 2021 (SSC 2021).
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) International Guidelines for management of Sepsis and Septic Shock are 
updated every four years. When first released in 2004, the SSC made more than 50 individual 
recommendations. Recognising that a long list was unlikely to transform practice, the authors worked with 
the Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI, US) to create two ‘bundles’ of care – one for within the first 
six hours including basic elements of care and EGDT (see below), and the second to cover the next 24 hours 
which included largely Critical Care aspects of therapy.
In 2012, the SSC endorsed the original protocol of Early Goal Directed Therapy (EGDT). This strategy was 
highlighted in 2001 by Rivers et al, as a bundle of treatments to be completed within the first six hours in 
patients with sepsis, with the aim of normalising the vital signs within a set range of targets utilising 
a combination of fluid resuscitation, vasopressors, inotropes, blood transfusions and oxygen therapies. 
The 2016 and 2021 guideline updates softened with respect to EGDT after three large multicentre studies 
across the world – ProCESS, ARISE and ProMISe – failed to show a reduction in mortality when comparing 
EGDT with standard care.
As a result, SSC 2021 suggests that during initial resuscitation we use as endpoints either or both  of lactate 
and capillary refill time to help guide our resuscitation, with the goal of each reducing over time. The 
evidence in support of the use of capillary refill time came from the 2019 ANDROMEDA-SHOCK study.
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign hour 1 bundle is as follows:  
It is clear that this bundle is very similar to the Sepsis 6!
85
i.Fluid management
Completion of the Sepsis 6 pathway within 60 minutes is not the end of the treatment for patients with 
sepsis. In many cases there will still be hypoperfusion within the tissues despite repeated crystalloid boluses. 
This is evidenced by a persistently elevated lactate level or hypotension <90mmHg despite crystalloid 
boluses of 20ml/kg – the presence of both together diagnoses septic shock. The Surviving Sepsis Campaign 
2021 (SSC 2021) recommends that a minimum of 30ml/kg be given over the first three hours of resuscitation, 
which is slightly higher than the volume recommended in the UK. Fluid management within sepsis can be a 
fine balance, as too much fluid has also been linked to a higher mortality rate, hence the need for early 
escalation and referral to Critical Care for the consideration of vasopressors and inotropes, and more 
advanced monitoring of the cardiovascular system.
Evidence is emerging to support the use of balanced salt solutions (such as 'Hartmann's' or 
'Plasma-lyte') over isotonic saline (0.9% saline), and SSC 2021 now suggests balanced salt solutions be 
used in preference. This is in part due to a risk of harmful hyperchloraemia with 0.9% saline (‘normal 
saline’), since this solution carries a high chloride ion content.
An initial fluid challenge of 500mls given rapidly in under 15 minutes, followed by further challenges guided 
by the repeated sampling of lactate, is recommended for patients with a high lactate or hypotension. If the 
initial lactate is greater than 2 mmol/l, repeated lactate measurements after each 10ml/kg bolus are 
recommended to guide resuscitation. Several studies suggest that Albumin can also be effectively utilised as 
part of fluid management in a patient with septic shock, but this is not normally as readily available or as cost 
effective as a crystalloid. For ongoing fluid management during the first 24 hours, there is significant debate 
between 'restrictive' and 'liberal' fluid administration strategies. SSC 2021 was unable to find evidence to 
recommend one strategy over another, therefore we propose the correction of hypovolaemia and 
administration of fluid to cover maintenance requirements and insensible losses.  What is clear is the 
evidence against using starches and gelatins (such as Hydroxyethyl starch (HES/HAES) / Voluven or 
Gelofusine) as these can be detrimental in patients with sepsis, with a higher risk of acute kidney injury. 
Patients who are bleeding will obviously require blood products, howev-er in those who are not bleeding 
evidence supports transfusing only when the Hb is <7.0g/dl. 
ii.Vasoactive drugs
A continued state of tissue hypoperfusion despite 20ml/kg of fluid resuscitation may require the introduction 
of vasoactive medications. Aiming for a MAP of 65mmHg, as a rule of thumb in people who are normally 
normotensive, the first-choice vasopressor is norepinephrine (historically called noradrenaline). If blood 
pressure isn’t improved with the use of norepinephrine alone, some centres add vasopressin as a second 
line, though the evidence base for this is weak. Both 
will ultimately require the insertion of a central venous 
catheter and transfer to Critical Care, but SSC 2021 now suggest that they be started peripherally as soon as 
possible to avoid significant delays. Some patients will require a higher MAP to maintain their renal function 
if they are normally hypertensive. The Critical Care Outreach Team may facilitate this treatment commencing 
at the point of deterioration to help stabilise the patient before transfer to a level two (‘HDU’) or three 
(‘ITU’) facility. 
Through early intervention and increasing the systemic vascular resistance with norepinephrine, the aim is to 
both increase the blood pressure to better perfuse the other major organs and to increase the oxygen 
delivery to the tissues thus reducing anaerobic respiration, demonstrated by a decrease in lactate. It is, 
however, important that the patient is well filled first with crystalloids to 20ml/kg as described above. A 
bedside ‘echo’ can be beneficial in these patients to gain a better all-round picture, as well as monitoring of 
the haemodynamic status and cardiac output via equipment such as a PiCCO or LiDCO®.
86
iii. Antimicrobial therapy
The administration of a combination of broad spectrum antimicrobials within one hour of recognition of 
people most severely ill with sepsis or septic shock is important due to the increased mortality in some 
patient groups associated with every hour of delay in the sickest patient groups. In the 2021 Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign guidelines update, it was recognised that for patients without shock and for those in whom the 
diagnosis of sepsis was unclear, a more generous 3 hour window in which to make and enact a decision 
around antibiotics would be reasonable, not associated with harm and would improve diagnostic and 
prescribing accuracy. This is reflected in the 2022 Academy of Royal Colleges guidance and the 2024 NG51 
update, and therefore also in our associated clinical tools.
Ideally, blood cultures should be taken before these are administered, but if these are unobtainable for any 
reason it is imperative not to delay the antimicrobials. These antibiotics should be reviewed by a senior 
clinician between 24 and 72 hours, following any results and sensitivities; the antimicrobials should be 
narrowed down to treat the specific pathogen. For courses continuing beyond this range, daily assessment 
should take place to consider the appropriate time to de-escalate from IV to oral. In some patients, source 
control may require surgical intervention, removal of invasive lines or even early delivery of a baby. Ideally if 
any of these are required, they are best facilitated as soon as possible, but best practice would be within 6 
hours of recognition. If, after initial resuscitation, a cause of acute illness other than sepsis is identified (if 
sepsis is no longer suspected), then antimicrobials should be discontinued immediately.
iv. Respiratory support
Some patients with sepsis will not only require invasive monitoring and cardiovascular support, but also 
respiratory support via mechanical ventilation. This could be via non-invasive ventilation (NIV) via a nasal /
face mask, or invasive ventilation with an endotracheal tube. If intubated, a lower tidal volume of 6ml/kg 
based upon the patient’s predicted body weight is targeted. Other lung protective measures of limiting the 
plateau airway pressure to 30cm H2O, using lower tidal volumes and using a higher peak end expiratory 
pressure (PEEP) to recruit alveoli should also be employed. Refractory hypoxemia and ARDS can be managed 
using ‘recruitment manoeuvres’ or potentially nursing the patient in the prone position rather than the 
traditional supine. Although lung protective measures are beneficial in sepsis-induced ARDS there is evidence 
that mortality is higher if ventilatory techniques such as high frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) are 
used, however SSC 2021 now suggests that extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) be considered in 
patients not responding to standard ventilatory strategies.
Due to the increased vascular permeability in these patients, careful fluid management is paramount and 
elevating the head of the bed to between 30-45˚ as a preventative measure against the development of 
Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia (VAP) is beneficial. Ensuring the patient is not too heavily sedated, and 
using regular sedation ‘holds’ will facilitate weaning protocols from mechanical ventilation by allowing 
them to breath spontaneously when able, as well as reducing the risk of delirium.
v. Renal therapy
Patients in septic shock can experience a prolonged period of reduced cardiac output or hypoperfusion, 
which can lead to a prerenal acute kidney injury (AKI). Careful exclusion of any nephrotoxic drugs is 
important, but, if essential, doses of such drugs should be adjusted to limit further damage. Treatment goals 
include achieving  haemodynamic stability through the restoration of normal circulating volume and the use 
of vasopressors and inotropes when needed, and treating the precipitating cause. Fluid overload is 
associated with poorer outcomes and can be the trigger for starting continuous renal replacement therapy 
(CRRT) to remove excess fluid and aid fluid balance. CRRT is recommended over intermittent RRT in unstable 
patients and is therefore the method of choice in most Critical Care environments.
87
vi. Nutrition
Early establishment of enteral nutrition is vital in any critically ill patient, and may be facilitated by the 
administration of prokinetics such as metoclopramide or erythromycin. Such medications, though evidence 
to support their use is slightly questionable, might assist with patients displaying signs of feeding intolerance 
due to reduced gut perfusion, gastroparesis or just due to the amount of sedation administered, and may 
help prevent aspiration of the gastric contents.
vii. Adjunctive therapies
Steroids have been recommended in previous guidelines to treat 'refractory shock', taken by most as shock 
requiring fairly high levels of vasopressors following fluid resuscitation. However, SSC 2021 now suggests 
that 200mg of hydrocortisone be used daily for all patients with an ongoing requirement for vasopressors.
Despite significant attention in the media, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic, there is no evidence in 
favour of high dose vitamin C infusions in patients with sepsis.
vii. Communication
Communication with the patient and their families is of vital importance. During any admission to Critical 
Care, prognosis and any goals for care will be discussed. Ensuring an open and honest relationship between 
staff and families will facilitate any end of life planning if required, and will also assist with the expectations 
for recovery. At this challenging time, it can be helpful to both the family members and the patient to 
maintain a diary of care, which can be looked at retrospectively and assist to fill in long gaps in time for the 
patient when they were sedated. This in turn can ease some of the Post Sepsis Syndrome symptoms they 
might experience in their recovery period. On discharge from the Critical Care environment, follow up should 
ideally be provided by the Critical Care Outreach team (or equivalent), with regular reviews on discharge to 
ensure no further problems develop and with a view to preventing re-admission. Literature on sepsis and its 
after-effects should be provided to the patient and family to provide safety netting advice, but also to inform 
of the possible side effects that may occur over the next few months.
88
SUMMARY
Hopefully this brief overview has given an insight into the ongoing care required following the first 60 
minutes from recognition of sepsis, including the changes to the international guidelines over the last few 
years. Early recognition, followed by escalation and treatment in the initial stages should be backed up by a 
timely referral to Critical Care if the initial resuscitation efforts do not stabilise the patient.
89
SPECIAL
PATIENT GROUPS
90
Neutropenic sepsis is time-critical and potentially fatal. It occurs in patients who are immunocompromised due 
to their anticancer or other immunomodulatory therapies. These therapies suppress the body’s normal 
response to infection, and the bone marrow cannot maintain production of white cells at the rate required. 
Neutropenic sepsis can lead to significant mortality in adults – cited as up to 21% but likely much higher 
especially f treatment is delayed or Critical Care therapy becomes necessary. As the volume of patients 
receiving systemic cytotoxic therapies increases, so will the number of patients developing neutropenic sepsis. 
Excellent communication with at risk patients is required to raise their awareness of the risk of sepsis, and 
their awareness of the symptoms that mean they should seek immediate medical review. Increasingly these 
therapies are delivered in a day case environment – safety netting advice regarding when to seek medical 
assistance is of vital importance to ensure early help is sought. Historically patients have been taught only to 
monitor their temperature- they’re now increasingly being educated around the symptoms of sepsis. A 
diagnosis of neutropenic sepsis relies upon a neutrophil count of 0.5 x 10⁹/l or less. The risk of sepsis increases 
both with the severity of neutropenia (how low the neutrophil count has fallen) and the duration of 
neutropenia (for how long it’s been low). Whilst the diagnosis of sepsis is the same according to phys-iological 
and biochemical parameters as in the general population, a high index of suspicion should be maintained in 
patients with either a temperature >38˚C or other signs of deterioration such as a NEWS2 
>5. If treatment is dependent on the return of blood results, this can lead to significant delays, and these
patients who are at great risk of sepsis will tend to deteriorate more rapidly than their counterparts without
neutropenia. Therefore, rapid assessment and escalation onto the Sepsis 6 pathway as soon as neutropenic
sepsis is suspected is recommended.
Febrile neutropenic patients are usually recognised and their treatment started early. Patients with non-fe-
brile neutropenia will often deteriorate further before being recognised, highlighting the importance of a 
standardised, graduated response system to deteriorating patients even in specialist areas. 
Maternal mortality from sepsis varies hugely depending on access to safe and affordable healthcare. 
Maternal mortality remains extremely high at around 400 per 100,000 live births in low middle income 
countries (LMICs) as compared with developed countries, where the mortality is lower- for example 8 per 
100,000 live births in the UK. This discrepancy is unacceptable, and there is evidence to suggest that 
maternal sepsis is on the increase, with at least 50,000 women dying from sepsis each year globally. THE
IMMUNOCOMPROMISED PATIENT
THE PREGNANTPATIENT01
02
91
Sepsis that occurs during pregnancy is termed ‘maternal sepsis’. If it develops within six weeks of delivery it 
is termed postpartum, or ‘puerperal’ sepsis. Sepsis is one of the leading causes of direct maternal death in 
the UK, and is the leading cause globally. This is partly because the immunological changes naturally 
occurring during pregnancy together with the increased exposure to healthcare, and additional risks such as 
with premature rupture of membranes or gestational diabetes, mean a pregnant woman is more suscep-
tible to infection than her non-pregnant counterpart. The natural adaptations o the body with pregnancy 
may mask the signs and symptoms of infection or an acute abdomen until the woman deteriorates. 
Risk factors for the development 
of sepsis in pregnancy
Sepsis can be as a direct result of the pregnancy or an indirect cause unrelated to the pregnancy, for instance 
pneumonia or a urinary infection. Following a number of maternal deaths from the H1N1 influenza 
pandemic, the flu vaccine is now routinely offered to pregnant women in most industrialised countries. The 
commonest sources for sepsis are urinary tract prenatally and genital tract postnatally.  E. coli  accounts for 
one third of episodes of sepsis, and infection with group A streptococcus can rapidly progress to septic shock. 
Due to the physiological changes in pregnancy, the National Early Warning Score (NEWS) is not designed for 
use in pregnant patients. Use of a modified obstetric early warning score (MEOWS) alongside the Ma-ternal 
Sepsis screening tool is recommended to facilitate the early recognition and escalation of deterio-rating 
maternal patients. 
The maternal sepsis screening tools are not only for use in 
patients who are currently pregnant, but also for those who 
have recently been pregnant and are within the post-partum 
period.
A sepsis screening tool may also consider foetal distress. A 
foetal heart rate >160 bpm is of significant concern and is 
considered as an equal trigger when screening for sepsis as 
the woman looking sick. The Red Flags for a pregnant woman 
are the same as the Red Flags in their non-pregnant counterpart. 
Lactate levels should be interpreted with caution in 
women in active labour, as a rise is normal.
Any pregnant woman with suspicion of sepsis requires an 
urgent senior review and multidisciplinary care. It is highly 
possible that the timing of delivery may need to be influ-
enced by this diagnosis. Consideration should be given  to-
ward prophylactic treatment of the new-born if particularly at 
risk of neonatal sepsis, such as in women identified as having 
Group B Streptococci in their genital tract- some centres offer 
screening for this pathogen, which is the leading cause of 
severe infection in newborns. 
Specific guidance on managing sepsis in the pregnancy and 
the puerperium are available from the Royal College of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists’ Green Top series.
92
Sepsis is a major cause of death in the under-five population worldwide, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa 
and Asia where many sepsis-related deaths are preventable. The 2020 Global Burden of Disease study found 
that almost half of cases of sepsis globally occur in early childhood in resource-poor countries. This group of 
patients is vulnerable, and they often present with atypical or vague signs and symptoms, potentially 
resulting in delayed or inappropriate treatment. You should maintain a high index of suspicion in children, 
and have a low threshold for admission and observation. It is important to take a detailed history and to 
listen to the concerns of the parent or carer as they know their child best.
In young children and infants, language and understanding can be a communication barrier. You may need to 
take a collateral history from a parent or relative and use other means to communicate. If dis-charging a child 
or infant from your care, ensure that verbal and preferably written safety-netting advice has been given and 
that the care givers  know the warning signs of sepsis and when they should seek medical help.
Due to the nature of childhood illnesses, a fever can be quite common. Screening should take place for all 
infants and children who look unwell or are feverish, particularly with a temperature greater than 39˚C, but 
remembering that in those infants younger than three months a temperature of just 38˚C or more is a Red 
Flag. A low temperature (of <36˚C can be more concerning and is a Red Flag in all children and infants under 
12 years.
Children can often compensate well during a disease process like sepsis. This means that subtle changes can 
be missed until they suddenly decompensate and become extremely unwell. Early escalation to senior 
support is vital, and use of a Paediatric Early Warning Score (PEWS) with an appropriate escalation plan will 
ensure this happens. Parents are naturally concerned by childhood illness and awareness campaigns have 
potential to increase presentations- the symptoms above were agreed for public messaging between UKST, 
the Royal Colleges and Public Health England in 2016.THE CHILD
OR INFANT03
93
A senior review by a doctor of ST4 or higher (or equivalent pro-
fessional) is an integral part of the Paediatric Sepsis 6 in patients 
under 12. In critically ill children with sepsis, non-specialist areas 
will require support from their local PICU and retrieval teams. 
Communication using a tool such as SBAR or RSVP will ensure 
the urgency of the situation is relayed effectively, and no infor-
mation is missed.
Fluid management in children with sepsis can be difficult and 
should be guided by lactate. Fluid resuscitation should be initiat-
ed in children with a lactate >2 mmol/l. If the lactate is above 
4, PICU should be involved early. Similarly, if the infant or child 
remains decompensated after two initial 20ml/kg fluid boluses 
(or 10ml/kg in neonates), Critical Care advice regarding inotropic 
support should be sought – usually using dopamine or epinephrine. 
The fluid of choice is usually sodium chloride 0.9% for the 
initial 10ml/kg boluses in paediatrics, although if blood is being 
lost this will also need replacing. 
Whilst the management of the neonate with sepsis is beyond the scope of this book, special consideration is 
needed for this group due to their immature immune systems making them more susceptible to infection – 
particularly respiratory, urinary or line-based infections. Any underlying disease process or low birth weight 
contributes to a higher mortality; any suspected or proven infection in the mother during the third trimester 
will often indicate a need for prophylactic treatment in the new-born as well as in twin pregnan-cies where 
one twin develops an infection or sepsis shortly after birth. If a previous child developed an invasive strep B 
infection, this also puts a subsequent newborn at greater risk of developing the same.
Management of intravenous access, fluids and antibiotics in these patients is a specialised field. Metabolic 
changes including lactic acidosis and increased glucose requirements are recognised early responses to 
sepsis in the neonate, and other differences such as a depletion in vitamin B compounds and glutamine have 
also been noted. More research in these areas is required.
94
SUMMARY
• The treatment principles for patients with sepsis are identical regardless of the cause.
• Initial assessment and resuscitation should follow the ABCDE format with the application of the 
appropriate Sepsis Screening Tool.
• Patients should be managed using the Sepsis 6 approach. Liaison with Critical Care should be timely, 
particularly in the presence of septic shock or multi-organ failure.
• Patients with pneumonia represent the largest group of patients with sepsis.
• Common causes of sepsis aside from pneumonia include gastrointestinal pathology, urinary tract, biliary 
tract and skin infections.
• Sources will vary in the pregnant patient.
• Remember to keep an open mind when assessing a patient presenting with sepsis.
• The importance of consultation with microbiologists locally who will be aware of pathogens and 
resistance patterns in your own institutions cannot be over emphasised.
• Most organisations now have their recommended first-line empiric treatments for common infections on 
their intranet sites.
95
MICROBIOLOGY
96
The management of infections includes multiple facets, but in essence centres around identification of the 
pathogen, control of any source of infection including judicious use of antimicrobials where necessary, and 
management of any sequelae of infection including sepsis. 
Source control is, therefore, an essential part of managing sepsis where this is practicable. In this context, 
source control means physical removal of the source, such as drainage of abdominal collections, removal of 
invasive lines or surgical removal of infected tissue. Source control will also include re-establishing flow of 
fluid which has become obstructed – for example relief of biliary or urinary obstruction. To achieve effective 
and rapid source control may therefore demand close liaison with colleagues in surgery and radiology. 
However, for some conditions (such as pneumonia) where there is neither a collection of infected material 
amenable to drainage nor a presence of prosthetic material which can be removed, source control is not 
possible. Here, antimicrobial therapy, usually considered as an adjunct to source control, becomes the only 
way of controlling the trigger for sepsis. 
Initial antibiotic choice (assuming, as in the majority of cases, the likely pathogen is bacterial) is usually based 
on the suspected focus of infection, determined through clinical suspicion supported by radiological and 
microbiological evidence. It's vital that the right antimicrobials are given to control the infection and fight the 
organisms present, often meaning initially using broad spectrum ‘best guess’ agents with a later focus on a 
narrower spectrum when (if) the organism becomes known (known as ‘Start smart then focus’). Organisms 
take a while to grow; therefore taking the right sample and sending it in the right container as soon as 
possible following the diagnosis of sepsis can help to identify the likely patho-gens in a timely fashion. 
Taking samples
A sterile technique should be adopted when taking samples for microbiological investigation. Because a 
plethora of microorganisms are ubiquitous within our environment, they can easily contaminate samples, 
resulting in the predominant organism isolated from a culture being an environmental contaminant rath-er 
than a true pathogen. In the case of blood cultures, commensal skin flora can be picked up instead of true 
pathogens. If not correctly interpreted, such false positives can result in inappropriate antimicrobial 
prescribing, which could leave a patient undertreated, and/or put them at risk of acquisition of a multid-rug 
resistant organism or C. difficile infection. 
Advice on taking appropriate specimens can usually be obtained from local microbiology or infectious 
diseases teams. Once a specimen has been taken, it must be placed in a container that maintains viability of 
any pathogenic microorganisms during transit. For example, formalin kills organisms, so placing any samples 
in formalin-containing specimen pots is unlikely to yield any pathogens. Likewise, some viruses are easily 
inactivated by detergents (for example the influenza virus), swab sticks or the transport material (e.g. gel, 
activated charcoal) contained within wound swab containers. Using the right container for the suspected 
organism is essential.
Urgent samples
Many laboratories operate an on-call system for urgent microbiological specimens (e.g. tissues taken in 
theatre, CSF) – if any samples are urgent the laboratory team must be called to come in and process the 
samples. This is usually not necessary for blood cultures, but it is always better to check with your local 
laboratory. Many laboratories don’t place blood cultures in the incubator immediately if received over-night 
– we would encourage this practice to change.
97
Labelling of samples
All samples must be labelled correctly to avoid rejection once they reach the laboratory. There are UK 
standards for specimens, required to ensure that the sample has come from the patient stated on the 
request form and to ensure traceability back to the requestor and/or person taking the sample in case of 
queries. 
The minimum information required on the sample container is:
Patient details
Important clinical findings e.g. prosthetic heart valve 
in situ, known infectious condition such as TB or HIVLocation (i.e. ward or department)
Working diagnosis e.g. pneumoniaDate and time of sampling
Travel history over past 12 monthsType of specimen
Printed (legible) name and registration number of 
both requestor and person taking sample
Recent and current antimicrobial therapyThe request form must also contain the same information as well as :
98
These details are important, as different organisms tend to affect and infect different parts of the body, and 
require different conditions in order to grow. Prior knowledge of the type of infection suspected and the site 
affected helps the laboratory scientists and clinicians to determine which type of organisms they need to 
look out for, which can mean using different types of agar plates and techniques such as molecular PCR 
(polymerase chain reaction) and serological tests. Recent antimicrobial therapy can affect the ability to 
detect organisms which are susceptible to the antibiotics given, though modern blood culture media attempt 
to bind antibiotics present to reduce their masking effect.
Sepsis can occur in patients that have travelled abroad; common examples of travel associated infections 
that can cause sepsis include malaria, TB and typhoid fever. Some of these infections are extremely 
infectious e.g. typhoid (due to Salmonella typhi and Salmonella paratyphi), TB, viral haemorrhagic fevers (e.g. 
Ebola) and MERS-CoV infections. These can result in outbreaks, so it is always wise to consult local policies 
and liaise with your infection specialists – the microbiologist or infectious diseases clinician. Providing a travel 
history not only allows the infection specialist to advise on the most appropriate tests, it can also help to 
prevent ongoing transmission of infection to laboratory staff, other patients and other staff, including 
yourself.
Identifying pathogens
Isolating pathogens
Methods of identifying pathogens depend on what is trying to be identified.  Most bacterial organisms will 
grow on standard culture media. Anaerobes, fastidious bacteria, slow growing organisms and most 
mycobacteria (including TB) require different media and special growing conditions such as temperature and 
atmospheric conditions. Other organisms are so difficult to grow they need to be sent away to a specialist 
laboratory for testing, or require that alternative techniques such as serology and PCR be used. Often this can 
add to the time taken to identify an organism, hence the importance of clinical suspicion of the source of 
infection and likely pathogens affecting the patient being conveyed to the infection teams.  
If the incubator containing a blood culture sample detects the production of carbon dioxide by bacteria, it 
will flag the sample as positive. Specimens are then processed and usually spread onto agar plates, or put 
into special liquid media for harder to grow organisms.  When organisms grow, they appear as “colonies” on 
the plate, which can then be tested for identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Sometimes 
there is more than one organism present, in which case the individual organisms need to be “picked off” and 
cultured again to ensure that there is a pure growth of organism. This helps to ensure that we do not get 
false results with regards to identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing, which can lead to 
inappropriate antibiotic treatment.
Mixed E. coli (pink colonies) and Klebsiella pneumoniae  
(blue colonies) on a chromogenic agar platePure growth of Pseudomonas putida  on a blood agar plate
99
Identifying organisms
An organism needs to be identified before antimicrobial sensitivities can be performed.
In the laboratory, traditional identification techniques include API® test strips and automated identifi-
cation systems such as VITEK® 2. The former identifies organisms using biochemical tests and the latter 
utilises colour-coded indicators to provide a phenotypic profile of the organism. Blood cultures
Identification of microorganisms that are causing a blood stream infection is made by incubating blood taken 
from an affected person. In most institutions this is done using automated contin-uous monitoring 
incubation systems. The blood culture bottles contain mixtures of a culture medium, an anticoagulant and 
resin or charcoal mixtures to reduce the effects of antimicrobial agents and oth-er toxic compounds. In 
adults, there are two bottles in a blood culture “set”; an aerobic bottle and an anaerobic one. To optimise 
recovery of microorganisms an adequate volume of blood is required; this is approximately 8-10 ml blood 
per bottle. This volume helps optimise recovery of microorganisms from the blood even when there are very 
low numbers of organism (<1 colony forming unit per ml blood) present. Overfilling blood cultures above 15 
ml per bottle will not improve yield; it will however increase the risk of “false positive” alerting of a positive 
growth when there isn’t one. 
Two to three sets of blood cultures should be taken within 24 hours of an episode of sepsis. Filling only a 
single bottle or set means that an inadequate volume of blood is cultured, resulting in a substantial number 
of bloodstream infections being missed. For paediatrics there is only one blood culture bottle per “set”; 
there will be local guidelines as to how much blood to put in the bottle according to age. Once inoculated, 
blood culture bottles are incubated in the automated continuous monitoring blood culture system. At the 
base of each bottle there is either a device which detects a pH change due the production of CO 2. This 
change in CO 2 is due to the organism in the blood culture respiring. It is important therefore not to obscure 
the bottom of the blood culture bottles with a patient label! 
Once the change in CO 2 reaches a certain level, the machine signals to say that there is a positive blood 
culture. The bottles are then used to make Gram stains which are examined under the microscope for the 
presence of organisms, and also inoculated onto agar plates to allow colonies to grow. These colonies are 
then used for identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. 
API® strips (courtesy of Biomérieux) 
100
Antibiotic susceptibility testing plate. The clear zones 
around the white antibiotic-impregnated discs indicate that the organism is susceptible to that antibiotic. No zone/a very small zone around a disc indicates that the organism is able to grow in the presence of that organ -
ism i.e. it is resistant to it. This plate shows a likely MRSA (methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus ).More recently, laboratories have been using Matrix Assisted Laser Desoprtion/Ionisation Time of Flight Mass 
Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). This allows rapid identification of organisms; time from sample preparation 
to final result has been reported to be as little as 30 minutes. This can reduce the turnaround time for 
identification by 2-3 days, which is a great advancement in the identification of organisms that cause sepsis.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing
Once an organism is grown in the laboratory, antimicrobial susceptibility testing needs to be undertaken to 
determine what antibiotics will work against this organism. Automated susceptibility testing using platforms 
such as VITEK® 2 can produce a result within one working day. Disc susceptibility testing is another method 
commonly used. It can take 48-72 hours to get a result, as the organism needs to be incubated in the 
presence of special antibiotic discs. Both methods require a positive culture (i.e. the organism needs to have 
grown) and provide phenotypic profiles of the antimicrobial susceptibilities. 
Molecular techniques are increasingly used to provide a genotypic profile of antimicrobial susceptibilities for 
an organism. These are most commonly used where the organism is difficult or slow to grow, for example TB 
(using whole genome sequencing). Another way they are used is in situations where either a resistant 
organism needs to be identified quickly in order to manage both the patient and the risk of ongoing 
transmission of infection to others, or where an unusual or particularly virulent organism which is 
susceptible to particular antibiotics is suspected (e.g. Legionalla  species, Streptococcus pneumoniae ) – an 
example of this is using PCR (polymerase chain reaction) to identify MRSA on screening.
Difficult to grow o rganisms
Sometimes, if an organism is hard to grow, the laboratory has to rely on the detection of the organism’s 
antigen, or patient antibodies to that organism, using serological tests. These tests tend not to be done in 
real time, and many require a four-fold increase in titres to make a diagnosis, using samples taken at least 
two weeks apart. Hence most diagnoses of infections made using serological testing are made 
retrospectively, requiring the clinician to treat on suspicion of an infection until confirmation of the diagnosis 
is made.
Molecular techniques
Causative pathogens are cult ured in less than 50% of cases of clinically ident ified sepsis. This can be due to 
difficulties in culturing t he organism because of the nature of the organism, or prior antimicrobial therapy.
101
Molecular methods can be used in the diagnosis of infection, for rapid detection of viruses, fastidious slow 
growing organisms and highly infectious organisms that would be dangerous to culture (often known as 
potential agents of bioterrorism). The methods most commonly used in the diagnosis of sepsis include  PCR, 
whole genome sequencing and 16s rRNA sequencing. PCR uses heat and enzymes to amplify small amounts 
of DNA or RNA to make them into a large enough target to be detected. PCR is most commonly utilised for 
the diagnosis of influenza and other respiratory pathogens, Clostridium difficile , norovirus and TB. It can also 
be used to identify resistance gene products, such as in drug resistant TB and MRSA (methicillin resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus ). Most laboratories use PCR for the rapid identification of these organisms. 
PCR only identifies the presence of a gene; it does not differentiate between live and dead organisms. Whilst 
this can be a problem when used to follow up response to treatment, it is useful, for example, in cases of 
meningococcal sepsis, where antibiotics are given as soon as the condition is suspected, rapidly killing the 
causative bacteria Neisseria meningitidis . Because this organism is communicable, identifying 
it using molecular techniques means that we can give antibiotic prophylaxis to close contacts of infected 
persons, reducing on-going transmission.
In the near future, multiarray panels using molecular techniques will permit testing for the presence of 
multiple pathogens in whole blood, without the need for pre-culture. Whilst this has potential to improve 
antimicrobial stewardship, these tests still carry the limitations of molecular techniques and their impact on 
clinician behaviour will require careful evaluation.
16sRNA technology is used for the detection and identification of the most important pathogens such as 
Staphylococcus aureus  and Escherichia coli  from a whole blood sample, which does not require prior 
incubation. These generally provide a result within six hours of processing. The sensitivity of such testing is 
reported to be between 60% and 80%, therefore it is recommended that it is used as an adjunct to prompt 
antimicrobial therapy whenever sepsis is suspected, rather than used as a tool to exclude sepsis and not give 
antibiotics.  16s rRNA sequencing is also used to identify difficult-to-culture organisms, including those in 
patients who have received prior antibiotic therapy. This process detects a gene that is part of the 30S 
ribosomal subunit of an organism. This gene is present in all prokaryotic cells and so allows for identi-fication 
of an organism to genus level, sometimes even species level.  Whilst a useful test, it currently has no utility in 
the rapid diagnosis of pathogens due to the length of time required to undertake the process.
Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is an exciting new development which determines the whole DNA 
sequence of an organism’s genome at a single time. It allows for the identification of antimicrobial resistance 
genes as well as identification of the organism itself. It takes time to undertake this process, and currently its 
biggest utility in infection is for identification and antimicrobial susceptibility determination of Mycobacteria, 
including TB. 
Biomarkers
Whilst both culture and molecular techniques are useful in helping to identify pathogens that can result in 
sepsis, there is a need to diagnose sepsis at the patient’s bedside to ensure that the right treatment 
is given first time. Biomarkers can support a clinical suspicion of sepsis, or make it less likely, and can be used 
to monitor disease progression. At least 178 different sepsis biomarkers have been reported in the literature; 
however, very few have been widely established in clinical practice due to a lack of sensitivity and/or 
specificity. Procalcitonin is one commonly used biomarker for sepsis although even this is not in widespread 
use in the UK as it is insufficiently sensitive or specific as a stand-alone; this is a peptide that is released into 
the blood stream during bacterial infections. In sepsis, procalcitonin levels can be very high. There are many 
commercial tests available on the market that measure levels of procalcitonin; however in 2015 NICE 
concluded in their guidance on procalcitonin that there is currently not enough evidence to recommend 
using these tests in the NHS and that further research is required. Some hospitals do use procalcitonin tests, 
mainly as a guide to stopping antimicrobial therapy, a practice which increased in popularity during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. 
102
SUMMARY
Microbiological tests can help you to tailor subsequent antibiotic therapy, to prevent adverse effects and 
drug resistance developing. However, whilst there are many tests that can be performed to help diagnose 
the cause of sepsis, currently there is nothing (yet!) that can reliably identify the causative pathogen at the 
bedside. 
It is always best to look for the likely source of infection and treat according to your local protocols for the 
type of suspected infection. Using previous microbiology results can help you tailor the antimicrobial 
therapy to cover all likely pathogens.
If in doubt please contact your duty microbiologist for advice.
103
HUMAN FACTORS
IN SEPSIS
104
Human factors (also termed ergonomics) has fast become an important scientific discipline in safety-critical 
industries such as the military and airline industry. In these complex organisations, non-technical skills 
including leadership, decision-making and performance all influence how people behave within a system. In 
recent years, the importance of human factors has been increasingly recognised within the National Health 
Service (NHS), and human factors teaching underpins patient safety and quality improvement to promote 
high quality patient care. 
There has been a culture shift within the NHS to recognise the importance of human factors at every level 
within the health service. There is more focus on human interaction with equipment and standardisation of 
procedures within the NHS to help reduce medical errors and improve patient safety.
The Swiss cheese model by James Reason is used across many industries to describe the causation of 
accidents. It uses the analogy of Swiss cheese to demonstrate how the holes in the cheese are not usually 
aligned. These represent potential hazards. It is only when all the holes in each layer align that an accident or 
adverse event can occur.
Another way to visualise errors is to use the tip of the iceberg model. This describes an adverse outcome as 
the tip of the iceberg, while below the tip are many less visible errors, which occur far more frequently. This 
model was used to promote road safety through means of wearing a seatbelt. 
The Swiss Cheese model underpinning errors in healthcare, adapted with permission from James Reason
The lack of human factors training in the National Health Service (NHS) was highlighted after the tragic death 
of a patient called Elaine Bromiley during routine surgery. Her death was largely attributed to a breakdown in 
human factors through a lack of leadership, teamwork and communication. She was the wife of Martin 
Bromiley, a pilot who specialised in human factors training. After his wife’s death in 2005, Martin focused on 
raising awareness about human factors and founded the Clinical Human Factors Group (CHFG) to improve 
safety within the NHS ( www.chfg.org).
105
Sepsis is a complex condition associated with poor outcomes when the diagnosis is delayed and treatment is 
not started promptly. Time pressures, high stress levels and an unpredictable clinical environ-ment often 
compound managing such sick patients. Many different teams and healthcare workers will be involved with 
the care of patients with sepsis, and effective leadership and an organised team approach are vital in the 
timely delivery of treatment. An understanding of the environment we work in, the role of individuals 
working with one another and the interactions we have are vital if we are to succeed in optimising patient 
safety and delivering high quality care to patients presenting with sepsis. 
We are only human, and therefore we are all bound to make mistakes. Being aware of human errors through 
human factors training can help us to decrease the risk of both potential hazards and adverse events form 
occurring. There are a number of important elements involved in human factors, which we can address to 
improve patient safety. These include: cognition, distraction, physical demands, the envi-ronment, product 
design, teamwork and process design. 
The NHS demands that high-quality care be delivered to patients through a safe, effective and free 
healthcare system. Human factors affect the entire NHS from individuals to teams within it. People are often 
working in a dynamic and unpredictable environment and are making difficult decisions under pressure. 
Effective leadership is vital alongside education and training to raise awareness around the importance of 
human factors in healthcare and promote a safety culture in the effective management of sepsis. A video of this case has been produced by Simpact with Martin’s 
permission: https://emcrit.org/emcrit/the-new-elaine-bromiley-videos/Watch
106
CASE STUDY
You are the SHO on call for Critical Care and you are fast bleeped to a cardiac arrest on the ward. 
When you arrive the scene is chaotic, you do not introduce yourself to everyone, there are many people 
there already and they do not introduce themselves to you. You are unsure who is in charge, who is a doctor 
or who is a nurse. You ask a colleague, another junior doctor with a name badge on what you can do to help. 
He asks you to take blood. This task is difficult and you decide to do a femoral stab. You give the blood to 
your colleague and he puts it in blood bottles. 
After sending the blood your colleague realises he has sent the blood and labelled it with another patient’s 
details. There were 2 patients with similar names in that bay and the wrong patient stickers were in this 
patient notes. He calls the lab and tells them immediately about his error. He sent blood for cross match, 
which could potentially have resulted in disaster. 
There were many small errors here and we can see how the holes in the Swiss Cheese are starting to line up. 
The situation is chaotic and no one took the time to pause, introduce themselves or allocate a team leader 
and team roles. This is often the case in emergency situations when organisation and structure become even 
more important. You were then asked to perform a task which you did to help save the patient’s life. 
However, looking back, you did not check the patients name or see if they had a wrist band on, you then 
handed the blood to someone else to label. When doing a cross match, no matter how life threatening the 
situation, the person taking the blood should label the blood themselves, checked against the patient’s 
wristband. The blood was then labelled incorrectly against the patient label, and this be-longed to a different 
patient. 
Luckily the junior doctor labelling the blood realised his mistake. A root cause analysis was done by the blood 
bank and the team members were educated about the errors that occurred. 
107
AFTER SEPSIS
SURVIVOR ISSUES
108
For around 40% of patients surviving sepsis, leaving hospital is not the end of their problems. Around 40% of 
survivors of a hospital admission with sepsis experience long-term sequelae. 
These are particularly prevalent when a person has spent time in Critical Care, is elderly or has significant 
health issues before sepsis.  For some, reasons for these sequelae are obvious. Microvascular changes and 
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulopathy can result in loss of digits or limbs, acute lung injury can result in 
respiratory dysfunction, and acute kidney injuries can lead to a reliance on dialysis.
Increasingly, however, we are beginning to understand what we describe as ‘Post-Sepsis Syndrome’ (PSS). 
This is a term used to describe a group of problems that commonly occur following sepsis, which fall into one 
of three categories: physical, cognitive and psychological (see table 1). Whilst our understanding of the 
aetiology is incomplete, we suspect that changes in the microcirculation and the action of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines may play a role. 
More recently, patients affected by COVID-19 have coined the term 'Long COVID'. The after-effects noted are 
strikingly similar to those described by people who have survived sepsis, perhaps not unsurprisingly. The UK 
Sepsis Trust now offers support to people affected by COVID-19 as well as by sepsis caused by other 
pathogens.
Post-Sepsis Syndrome can affect people of any age, it commonly takes 6 to 18 months to recover, with some 
survivors taking considerably longer and some never resuming their pre-sepsis state of health again. A study 
from the University of Michigan Health System, (JAMA 2010), found that older sepsis survivors were at higher 
risk for long-term cognitive impairment and physical problems than others of their age who were treated for 
different illnesses. Their problems ranged from not being able to walk, even though they could before they 
became ill, to not being able to undertake everyday activities, such as bathing, toileting, or preparing meals. 
Changes in mental status can range from no longer being able to perform complicated tasks to not being able 
to remember everyday things- this can bring challenges in reurning to work and in managing relationships 
and the home.
Compared to non-sepsis admissions, sepsis survivors have a greater risk of readmission, with 30-day 
readmission rates averaging between 19% and 32%. The most common reason for admission is treatment 
either for unresolved/recurrent infection or new infection. The reasons for recurring infections post sepsis 
are poorly understood – it may be a result of immunosuppression from a persistent compensatory anti-
inflammatory response to the initial pro-inflammatory storm; Immunological investigations will sometimes 
demonstrate impaired reactivity of immune cells in survivors of sepsis.  These recurring infections can be a 
particularly distressing for survivors and wearing both physically and emotionally; each time impacting on the 
small improvements that have been made. A high proportion of survivors live in constant fear and anxiety 
about the prospect of acquiring another infection and become preoccupied with the prospect that they may 
develop sepsis again.  
Some sepsis survivors are discharged from hospital without being informed that they have had sepsis, and 
many are discharged without information on what to expect during recovery. There are survivors that will 
have uncomplicated recoveries, with some fatigue in the first few weeks but quickly returning to their pre-
sepsis condition and resuming life as it was before. It should not be the intention to cause unnecessary 
concern to those recovering from sepsis, but many survivors will experience some of the long term physical 
and mental sequelae. It is important that prior to discharge we inform survivors that they may have some 
lasting effects as a result of their sepsis and for some recovery can be lengthy process and they may need to 
make significant adjustments to lifestyle and employment conditions.  
109
There is currently little in the way of support for survivors once discharged from hospital. If they have been 
admitted to Critical Care they may have access to a follow up service providing unit visits and the opportunity 
to attend a support group. For those whose care was provided on a ward only, as is increasingly happening 
with early diagnosis and treatment, there is no follow up provided and often no discharge information is 
given relating to recovery. Many of these patients frequently present themselves to General Practitioners, 
Out of Hours services and Emergency Departments with a variety of unexplained symptoms and problems 
they were not anticipating.  
The UK Sepsis Trust provides a helpline 24/7, with access to trained support nurses who can 
explain to survivors what sepsis is and can discuss recovery and any problems being experienced. They can 
also signpost to one of our 33 support groups in towns and cities across the U.K. They can offer advice and 
support on how to manage some of these problems. There is currently no specific follow up and 
rehabilitation service offered for sepsis survivors and no one particular speciality that ‘owns’ sepsis, thus 
currently patients are referred to other professionals for help and support such as therapists for treatment of 
anxiety and PTSD, Occupational Therapists and Physiotherapists for fatigue management, pain clinics for 
chronic pain management and immunologists for investigation of recurring infections. 
UKST offers a number of support groups nationwide – informal meetings open to anyone affected. These 
offer an opportunity to meet other survivors and share their experiences and offer peer support.  A member 
of the UKST support team attends the group to answer questions and provide advice and support if needed.    
There is a great need for more research into the long-term consequences of sepsis for survivors. As we 
become more successful at identifying and treating sepsis, this cohort of patients is going to grow with 
significant economic and resource consequences – we need to identify ways of managing sepsis in order to 
reduce these effects and develop rehabilitation and follow up services so as to optimise their outcome.     
1. Sepsis can result in physical, cognitive and psychological long-term
sequelae.
2. Post Sepsis Syndrome (PSS) is a term used to describe the variousproblems that can result following sepsis.
3. PSS can occur in any sepsis survivor not just those that have had acritical care admission.
4. Sepsis survivors require follow up and may need referral to specialistservices.
5. The long-term effects of sepsis are poorly understood and there is aneed for more research in this area.KEY POINT
110
Physical Psychological and cognitive 
Lethargy / excessive tiredness
Poor mobility / muscle weakness Breathlessness / 
chest pains
Vertigo
Swollen limbs (excessive fluid in the tissues) Joint 
pains
Hair loss
Dry / flaking skin and nails
Taste changes
Poor appetite
Changes in vision
Changes in sensation in limbs
Repeated infections
Reduced kidney functionAnxiety / fear of sepsis recurring
DepressionFlashbacksNightmaresInsomniaPTSD (Post Traumatic Stress Disorder)Poor concentrationShort term memory lossMood changesLoss of confidence and self-esteem
111
sepsistrust.org
0800 389 6255SURVIVE 
SEPSIS

